, how great an advantage it was to himself , and to his ministerial works , that he was possessed deeply with this true sentiment , that the pleasing of god is the proper ultimate end of man , ( not doubting
him , no wonder if it were his meditation day and night , psal. 1 . 2 . & 104 . 34 . & 119 . 103 . & 94 . 19 . and how great a solace was this in his
. but above all , it is his highest excellency in my eyes , that he attained to the right temperament of the christian religion , and to a truly evangelical frame of spirit , suitable to the glorious hopes of faith
thee back from honour . it is more honourable and comfortable to be kept from honour by god and a good conscience , than to be honoured by men on sinful terms . and the moderation and peaceableness of this holy man
his great successes ; though it was not the way to preferments , honours , no nor safety and quietness to the flesh . had balaam @ throughout sincerely , it had been a very honourable and comfortable word to him from
. and without them , it is not a flashy light and frigid knowledge that will save the soul . and on the other side , alas , how ordinary is it for zeal to make a bussle in the dark ,
unreasonable thing ? no doubt it was an excellent help to his own faith , to have so clear and full a sight of all those subsidiary natural verities , which are known propriae luce , and are out of the reach
fish for applause ; and it is so meet to avoid appearances of pride , and ostentation , that few think meet to take this course . and the next desirable is , that their intimate friends would write their lives at
ceremonies of others . and it is a notable benefit of this kind of history , that it is fitted to insinuate the reverence and love of piety into young unexperienced persons : for before they can read much of theological treatises
by lying tongues . and it is not a small benefit of this kind of history , that the weak and lame christians may see such excellent examples for their imitation ; and the sluggish and distempered christian may have so real
sickness : or , as it is more pleasant to read of the building of cities , than of their ruins ; or of the cures of a physician , than of the hurts done by robberies and frays ; yea ,
and most necessary subjects : it is most eminently divine , as recording those works of god , in which he most graciously condescends unto man , and those actions of men , in which they have most nearly to do with
affected to your interest . it is not pleasing a neighbour , because rich and powerful , but saving england , that you are to eye : neither pay or return private obligations at the cost of the nation ; let not
only against your interest , but it is disgraceful to you and the parliament you choose . the representative of a nation ought to consist of the most wise , sober and valiant of the people , not men of mean spirits or
been a reputed pensioner ; it is not only against your interest , but it is disgraceful to you and the parliament you choose . the representative of a nation ought to consist of the most wise , sober and valiant of
, our not considering what it is to choose a parliament , and how much all is upon the hazard in it , may at last loose us fatally by our own choice . for i must needs tell you , if
this we are under : it is made up of so many unusual and important circumstances ( all affecting us to the very heart ) that whether we regard the long sitting of the late parliament , or its abrupt and most
pall . — meag . it is for your sake wee groan under these burdens . — yo : pall . the offall of sir tyrants trunks ! brother , pray know these gentlemen , they owe you more money than they
please heaven . snor . it is day . isle not to bed sir now ; my watch shall be drunk , at your worships wedding . yo : pall . they shall , and there is gold enough to keep them
your brother has it , it is a gift to him of one fair manor , amongst those many that you have in possession sir ; and in this bond , you're witness to three thousand pounds i give to luce !
; will you consent ? it is but a thousand pounds a piece to these two gentlemen ; and five hundred more t' engine . your crime is then concealed , and your self free . meag . no , he may
to him mistress snore ; it is he has kept your husband from his bed so long , to watch him for a church robbery ! mist : snor . ah , thou iudas ! i thought what thou'ldst come to !
i should marry you ; it is in confidence , i have the better wit ; and can subdue you still to quietness , meek sufferings , and patient awe . eld : pall . you rap me still anew . yo
. eld . pall . it is done ! a vow inviolate ! he opens the chest and lets him out . yo . pall . now silence brother ! not one curse , nor thanks— exit yo . pall . eld
her gold with her ? it is strange her old shoes were not interred too ; for fear the days of edgar should return , when they coined leather . yo . pal . come sir , lay down your instrument !
let's not stay long , it is a cold night ; and i have nothing on my bed at home , but a thin coverlet , and my wives sey petti - coat : she'll ne'er sleep ( poor soul ) till
chancel door ! engine . it is very late sir , whither will you go ? thrift . never too late too pray ; my heart is heavy ! engine . where shall i wait you sir ? thrift . at my
chest ; trust me , it is buried sir ; the key is here sir , of no use ! thrift . hah , engine ! give it me ! — engine . and sir , to vex your meditation more ,
hath the key brother ! it is but an hours dark contemplation more ! eld . pall . madam , here me speak . ampl . nay , no beginning of orations now ; this is a time of great dispatch ,
ample . come sir , it is decreed in our wise counsel , you must be laid some distance from this place ! eld . pall . pray save your labour ( madam ) i'le come forth ! amp . no sir
. so soon returned ! it is not midnight yet ! engine . i know the bait that tempts him back with such strange hast ; and have according to your will provided ( madam ) to betray his hopes ! ample
, a fair conversion , it is now fit i sue unto you , for his liberty ! ample . alas he hath so profited in this retirement , that i fear he will not willingly come out ! eld . pall
him the ayre , since it is become his food ! eld , pall . who's there ? what are you ? speak ! amp . a brace of mourning virgins sir ; that had you died in love , and in
. a hundred pall ! it was all his store ; it lies here my brave boy , warm , and secure in pouch ! pert . we'll share't anon .— what need your blush sir morglay , like a maid newly
ask a hundred pounds ; it is all i've left ! pert . sir do but think what a prodigious blemish it will be , both to your ingenuity , and fame , to be betrayed by one , that is believed
pall , come in pall ! it is done ! the spacious man of land , is now contented with his own length . ample . your brother's come to see you sir ! eld . pa. brother ! mad girls these i
but with worms . thrift . it is well thought on engine ! farewell engine ! be faithful , and be rich ! — engine . my breeding and good manners sir , teach me t'attend your bounty ! thrift . but engine
his litter sir ( as it is in your own rode ) you may persuade him move like a crab , backward ; for here's no mixture , but with worms . thrift . it is well thought on engine ! farewell engine
to 'th memory o'th dead ; it is profane . engine . you are obeyed ! but sir , let me advise you now to trust the care , and benefit of all your fate presents you in this house , to my
distressed rat ! ginet . it is retirement sir , and you'll come forth again , so sage ! ampl . sir pallatine ! — luce . your lady calls sir , to her , and be kind ! amp . will
hate enclosure , i ; it is the humour of a distressed rat ! ginet . it is retirement sir , and you'll come forth again , so sage ! ampl . sir pallatine ! — luce . your lady calls sir
enough to hold you : it were dangerous to have my ladies guardian to find you sir ! — they draw in a chest . eld . pall . how ! laid up like a brushed gown , under lock and key
passage down ! besides , it is not fit for you , and your great hopes , with my dependency on both , to have you absent when my lady dyes ; i know you must have all : sir i could
the cause ! luce . it is not seen sir in your face ! eld . pall . my face ! i grant you ; i bate inwardly ! i'm scorched , and dried , with sighing to a mummy : my
my strength ! ampl . it is only this : for fear some other should enjoy you when i'm cold , in my last sleep ; i would entreat you to sit hear , grow sick , languish , and dye with
implies no danger sir ; it is not in me t'urge any thing , but what your own desires would choose ! eld : pall . name it ! like eager mastiffs , chained from the encounter of their game , my
balls to funeral dew ! it is too late ! luce . ginet , my fears have in them too much prophecy , i told thee she would ne'er recover ! ginet . for my poor part , i wish no easier
our sight . amp . it is in vain , t'inquire the reason of that grief , whose remedy is past ; had you but felt so much remorse , or softness in your heart , as would have made you nobly
to such extremity ? then it is time , i seem to suffer too ; or else my hopes will prove sicker than she ! luce . more cruel than the panthar on his prey ! why speak you not ? no
gold , and jewels ! it was like a brother ! but for his two confederates ; though i should meet them in a mist , darker than night , or southern fens produce , my eyes would be so courteous sure
! yo : pal . it is believed sir , in a trice ! eld : pal . and that your wit can lead our reverend matrons , and tefty widows of fourscore , to scale ( and in their smocks )
into this way ; and it was at first somewhat against my conscience too ! eld . pall . if not to vex the zealous spirit in you , i would know why ? yo : pal . good faith i've searched
charge ! well , though it is worse than steel or marble to digest ; yet i have learned , one stop in a careire , taint not a rider with disgrace ; but may procure him breath to win the race
once possessed of all , it is as your conscience will vouchsafe . thwack . dost thou suspect ? isle stay here till thou fetch a bible , and a cushion , and swear kneeling ! eld : pal . my faith
the rabbis were alive , it is thought he would corrupt their wives . follow me knight !— thw . pallatine , half the large treasure that i get is yours ! eld : pal . good faith ( my friend )
your rest ! amp . it is late ( indeed ) the silence of the night and sleep be with you gentlemen ! exeunt . ample , ginet : engine yo . pall . madam , good night : but our heads
teeth ! engine . madame , it is time you were a bed ; for sure besides the earnest invitation which i left , writ in his chamber , these afflictions will disturb his rest , and bring him early hither to recover
you behold this ring ? it is worth all the bells in your church steeple , though your sexton , and side - men hung there too , to better the peal . snor . well , what's your request ? eld
designed ! snor . come along ! it is late . eld . pall . whither must i go ? queasy . to the counter sir , unless my rent be paid ! snore . and for being a bawd ! eld . palate
now from thought ? good ! it is designed ! snor . come along ! it is late . eld . pall . whither must i go ? queasy . to the counter sir , unless my rent be paid ! snore . and
thousand marks ! nay , it is time then to doubt , and tremble to . my gold ! my gold !— searches his pockets . and precious stones ! mist . snore . do you suspect my husband ? he hath
bridge . mist snore . it is indeed ! yet our paul was in the belly of one , in my lord majors show ; and husband you remember , he beckoned you out of the fishes mouth , and you gave
. eld . pall . it is time to get on wings , and fly ! here's a noise of thunder , wolves , women , drums , all that's confused , and frights the ear ! i heard them cry out
of children ! scirvie fleak ! it is not for nought you boyle eggs in your gruell , and your man sampson owes my son in law , the surgeon , ten groats for turpentine ; which you have promised to pay out
. fie upon me ! it is well known i'm the mother of children ! scirvie fleak ! it is not for nought you boyle eggs in your gruell , and your man sampson owes my son in law , the surgeon ,
snore . search now ? it is too late ; a woman had as good marry a cowlestaffe as a constable ; if he must nothing but search and search , follow his whores , and bawds all day , and never
it right or wrong ! it is four years rent , come childermas eve next ! snore . you see neighbour queasy the doors are open ; heere's no goods , no bawd left ; i'd see the bawd ! mist .
have my husband do ? it is past one by bow , and the bell - man has gone twice ! queasy . good master snore , you are the constable , you may do it ( as they say ) be
! his hatband too ! it is of grand price , the stones are rosiall , and of the white rock ! meag . i hung 'em purposely aside , they are all within my reach : shall i in ? yo :
eld : pall . well ; it is your turn to labour now , and mine anon , for your dear sakes gentlemen , i profess — pert . my friend shall wait upon you to your sheets , whilst i go and
. your boot , believ't , it is my exercise ! — eld : pall . well ; it is your turn to labour now , and mine anon , for your dear sakes gentlemen , i profess — pert . my friend shall
ladies longing ! meag . it is late sir . pray uncase !— they help to uncloath him . pert . your boot , believ't , it is my exercise ! — eld : pall . well ; it is your turn to
hath a noble mind ; but it is so much o'remastred by her blood , we fear nothing but death , or you can be her remedy ! eld : palate . and she is young ? meag . o ! as the
. gentlemen , it should ! it is a throat i can so little hide in such a cause , that i would whet your razor for it on my own shoe . pert . enough ! you shall know all ! this lady
the house , but , it was the best our friendship and our treasure could procure . exit . eld : pallatine , meager , pert , with lights . eld . pall . gentlemen ( if you please ) lead me
by the gils ; and it is fastened to a line will hold you sir , though your wits were stronger than your purse ! sir morglay thwack's gone home ; his lodging i have learned , and there are certain gins
the ladies mansion sir , it is hard by . eld : pall . hard by ! pert . so near , that if your lungs be good , you may spit thither : that is the house ! eld : pall
. a young lady sir . it is a secret will exact much care and wisdom in the delivery ; you should dismiss that gentleman ! eld : palate . a young lady ! good ! all the best stars in the firmament are mine
concern you much , therefore it is fit it be particular . eld : pall . from whom ! meager . a young lady sir . it is a secret will exact much care and wisdom in the delivery ; you should dismiss
the game ! thwack . it is the cause i come for ; a withered mid - wife , or a nurse who draws her lips together , like an eye that gives the cautionary wink , are those i would find
govern now in the town ? it is long since wee did traffic here , in midnight whispers , when the dialect of loves loose wit , is frighted into signs , and secret laughter stifled into smiles : when nothing's loud but
flings him a purse . it is gold ! my pendants , carckanets , and rings , my christening caudle - cup , and spoons are dissolved into that lump . nay , take all ! and with it as much anger
aches and bad fame ; it is worse than to have six new creditors , they each twelve children , and not bread enough to make the landlord a tossed , when he calls for ale and rent . think on that
. yo : palate . it is the business of the world : injuries grow . to get it , justice sits for the same end ; men are not wise without it ; for it makes wisdom known ; and to
right stamp ; i find it is not comely in thine eyes , to see vs sons of war walk by the pleasant vines of gascoiny , as wee believed the grapes forbidden fruit : sneak through a tavern with remorse ,
! meag . comrade ! it is time — yo : palate . what , to unship your trunks at billings gate ? fierce meager ! why such haste ? do not i know , that a mouse yoked to a pescod
the wise . pert . it was sir , no geographical fancy ( cause in our maps , i liked this region here more than that country lying there ) made me partial which to fight for . yo : palate .
give me thy hand ! it is a true one , and will no more forsake a bond , or bill , then a good sword ; a hand that will shift for the body , till the laws provide for both
to such vast expectation raised , as it were to be wondered at , not praised : and this , good faith sir poet ( if i've read customs , or men ) strikes you , and your muse dead ! conceave now too
, all should agree . then it is to such vast expectation raised , as it were to be wondered at , not praised : and this , good faith sir poet ( if i've read customs , or men ) strikes you
, but cry out , it is insipid ; your bold tongue may do it's master , not the author wrong ; for men of better palate will by it take the just elevation of your wit . t. carevv . the
that of venice , and it is composed palaces , and lesser fabrics , with courtesans looking out of windows , and balconees , fantastically adorned , some in italian , others in a turkish dress , and this prospect , prepares
to his state , since it is his love decrees it , not his fate . nay more , his message moves so low , i fear , what sounds like tender courtship in your ear , his jealous barons will dislike
as suddenly performed , as it was prepared : but there was a sad necessity for the delay ; and j may justly stile it a misfortune , that the general work could not receive the benefit of alteration by that unprofitable
of thy adultrous crime . it was i told it to valdaura , and made her think , thy guilt proceeded not from a mistake , but from thy wilful lust . i'ue strung thy nosthrill with a spinners thread , so
gave it to thy wife . it was i did counsel her to mingle it in thy wine , when thou were hot , and all thy pores open as thy mouth . parad . oh , oh , oh ! herm .
my lord . parad . it is hermegild , now i shall end my chief discovery . what a full sepulcher is this— carries her in . knocking again . now i must practise my disguise . revert the spring twice ,
too much . parad . it is as if the parca spoke . if there be any other whom your envy , or your hate would have dismissed the world , make him but known , and he is numbered with the
do not like this falconry : it is too sad a game for sinners—oh , oh , oh !— dies . parad . there died the noblest trophy of our war ! the lombards now have lost their victory . so hardy of
to live enthroned , but it is not safe to dye a king . parad . he doth pervert my sense . albo . let the drum cease ! isle have no more battles . he that to waste his trivial rage
yet who knows , but it was rather his revenge , then lust ; a furious riot , after that he knew i whored his queen— he blinds his own face with a scarf , sheathes his sword , and then kneeles
. and they say , it is your custom to sleep in pomatum masques . vollt . and that you paint your pretty vis'gnomies . grim . yes , and colour them so red , that you seem to blush more ,
my serious brain abhorred . it was my wonder ( since you are called his minion ) he could ere affect my look . i that am like coffing winter , old , and froward ; you the darling of the lusty
that was her word . it is fit i seem t' have drunk the med'cine up . good ! the rough young soldier may spy at last these spirits of the court , that walk in artificial clouds : or if their
from both ? vald . it was to enrage your violence , with hope to make you soon my executioner . for hearing you were false , i found no joy in life : your hand hath sealed my wishes . par
i drunk ? vald . it was healthful , as the blood of grapes to age , and all your faculties do still preserve their wonted harmony . parad . sweet spirit , do not riddle thus with heaven , nor sport
thy fame . vald . it is truth : and i confirm't with pride . par . oh , oh ! these are the mandrakes groans ( fatal ! ) for whosoever hears them , straight encounters death . now smile (
upon earth for me ; it is fit i grow immortal . vald . i did not think , his fancy , at this news , could prove so temperate . par . to sleep in cold earth , whilst my dead
hath told me all . it was wondrous strange ! our vows but new arrived in heaven , that did obliege our mutual faiths in love : and thou with savage lust to break them ? though grief hath much consumed my
in my eyes ; and it is no argument for sterne battle : else i would fight . to testify the joy my soul conceives , isle drink— herm . sir , you neglect to use her like a lover ; with
the brazen head , when it was about to speak— he takes the king aside . grim . you mean to hang me now ! albo . hast thou deserved an easier sentence ? grim . when i am dead , then
you fare like oberon . it is a very slender diet . the lean thigh of a wasp to dinner ; and some two or three of your own penitent tears for your beverage . grim . i'ue but so much breath
. frollo . i , it is it : he has them growing on his temples here—they'll shortly be as big as turnips . conrad . he must to roterdam , to the fat doctor there , and be stewed in a
is it because you saw , it was my chief virtue to affect a soldier ? grim . if she should be in earnest now ? these . i hope you do not utterly despair of life ? grim . i may linger
his life . grim . it is fourteen days since i have had a just occasion but to pick my teeth . these . alas the day ! grim . each of my thighs are dried , and hardened like an old
there's somebody approaching hither . it is no safe game to sport with kings . i'le be gon . gond . grimold , now trust to your own performance , i may have use for my ears , i would not yet
to age . herm . it is my wonder , in a state so rich as ours , a climate still befriended thus by nature ( flourishing with hopeful springs , and summers choked with wealth ) a soldier should be forced
the way to hell . it is a continued thorough - fare from this climate thither . or let me but delay my journey , till the trivial rage of christian princes , meet in horri'd battle ; and then i shall
vulgar pity i forgive . it was not the wanton taste of thy smooth limbs , that could provoke me use this stratagem . but love of my revenge . i'ue strongly now engaged thy power , to kill the king .
. by heaven and so it is . herm . o my officious soul ! must it be my crime to give the information up ? would i had known the king was here , you should have made another path ,
in her esteem . albo . it is a piece of courtship to salute at parting— kisses her . exit valdaura . rhod . is that a safe conjunction in so hot a climate ! albo . hell and death ! what raw
her kindly , sir : it is paradines bride . you have not seen her since she indeuour'd to increase the number of your subjects , with loss of her virginity . albo . rhodolinda doth so engross my love , that
cuny . your excuse procured , it is fit you now tell , how far in your defence i may engage my honour : is not your flesh a little tainted ! are you not unwholesome ? grim . o death , no
, hermegild . grim . it is no piece of unkindness to wish thee in hell , for all thy friends dwell there . you have none upon the earth . gentlemen will you be open to me ? cuny . in all
gray vvolfe . grim . it is then for hunger , sir . herm . captain , you mistake the king . he's royal as his blood , and liberal as the sun that shines on all . this unruly breath ,
me to your lord . it is all the pride in my ambition to do him service . vald . sir , he already knows your worth , and thinks your friendship precious . exit . her . i kiss your fair
mingling in this act .— it is wrought with skill , and apt leisure . his thoughts grow numerous , and engender horrid shapes ; such as fright his fancy . rhod . paradine , good night ! herm . hymen and
albo . isle do it . it is thought , i am immortal . the chief of my great ancestors , that made a wilde incursion ore this fertile soil , was but a tip of me . more wine ! — thy
: but i have hope it is your last fault . parad . i cannot reckon it among my faults . sir , you involve your meaning in your speech . the world shall find me honest . herm . you are
fingers . my lord , it was unkindly done t'affront my anger thus : but i have hope it is your last fault . parad . i cannot reckon it among my faults . sir , you involve your meaning in your
. grimold , away ! it is my desire you leave the presence . grim . i am obedient ( sir ) to your desire . gond . 'slight , thou hast made a brave retreat . vollt . i looked when
will express him mortal . it is for your safety , to avoid the presence . grim . isle bribe your lordship with a ginny toothpick ! herm . you must repent this language . parad . he must not , hermegild
thanks to your royal thrift ) it is your office to pay all ; your treasurers custom to pay nothing . thrusts him away . albo . do not interrupt my marriage rites ! grim . i cannot take your reference for payment
mistake the custom , or it is my treasurers office to pay my debts , not mine . grim . no sir , ( thanks to your royal thrift ) it is your office to pay all ; your treasurers custom to
is mortal . gond . it is the chief misery of princes , ne'er to understand their own crimes , to sin in ignorance . grim . true , his confessor , that in sight extern a patriarch seems , will gain
of your noble thoughts ; it was safe to doubt your love . but now i wish i were more worthy , and then would prove more liberal of my self . parad . let me enjoy thy hand ! that moist
through our thick walls . it was the powerful breath of your victorious fame , that conquered vs . to that we yielded : which as a rough blast that posts from the cold arctic pole , hath borne before it captived
unto me . govern . it is by you we are : no warlike ram , nor battering engine forced a bloody entrance through our thick walls . it was the powerful breath of your victorious fame , that conquered vs .
the order is already given . it was your royal will , we hasten in our march , therefore each squadron double their paces . albou . my boy , i bring thee home my chief trophy : thou dost delight me more
my gratitude : yet , it is meet our actions carry smooth equality : your consent must further all my suits you are the kings jewel , and hang richly in his ear . parad . you are precious unto her ,
rhodolinda names : you hear it is his edict we call her queen ? herm . thy vanquished country owes unto thy fame a tall pyramid ! the captived virgins of our nation shall in their last dirges sing thy praise with
use of tiumphs here ; it were a crime against pleasant youth , to waste this night , in overcivill fear . 3 move then like time , for love ( as well as he ) hath got a calendar , where
chaste , because they know it is her will , they should be so ; the valiant take from her their fire ! when this heavenly seat touched the earth , the kings majesty took out the queen , and the lords
scene opened , and within it was a transparent brightness of thin exhalations , such as the gods are feigned to descend in . in the most eminent place of which , her majesty sate , representing the chief heroin , environed
murmur's a sickness epidemical ; it is catching , and infects weak common ears ; for through those crooked , narrow alleys , all invaded are , and killed by whisperers . 4 this you discerned , and by your mercy taught
a sulleine age , when it is harder far to cure , the peoples folly than resist their rage ? after which there followed these several entries of antimasques . 1 . entry . wolfgangus vandergoose spagricke , operator to the invisible
descriptions of the sceanes , it is not amiss briefly to set down the histories from whence these proverbs took their original . for the first melas and arevanias of argos , and troezen conducted a common colony to habicarnassus in asia
in his breast , yet it is his fate , to rule in adverse times , when wisdom must awhile give place to crimes . 
, or understood , or it is by absence better known i shall be valew'd , when i'm gone . genius . yet stay ! o stay ! if but to please the great and wise philogenes . concord . should dews
? genius . i know it is the peoples vice , to lay too mean , too cheap a price on every blessing they possess th'injoying makes them think it less . concord . if then , the need of what is
thought you'd powdered me , it is well the heat is past . lord , how i dream't of taffeta kirtles , french gowns , and fine italian tires , that hung ( me thought ) by my bed side . sciolt
pious instruments ? fred . it was castraganio , and his sister amadine ; they are locked in the garret near the turret leads ? theand . give way to my revenge , that i may kill him with my foot , spurn out
too late . buon . it was not in the power of art to make that fume i promised you else you , had had it sir , but this will serve your turn as well , 't will end your lust
served my turn . arnold . it was a miraculous fever you was in . grido . well , shall i tell you gentlemen , believ't , i had eaten some strange odd meat , the pickled kidney of a goat , or
mauld her else . iasp. it was happy mine was at suck too . grid . you are in the right ; for had she been but old enough to were a bondgrace on her brow , and nibble gingerbread , sh'ad served
thou sootl'd with silly hope it is concealed , the stars are witnesses ; they all grew weary of the night , and wished for clouds to hide their radiant eyes , from what unwillingly they saw ? eurith . ease my
sister learnes to spin : it is the dukes command , and till i can provide a ship , i must enclose you in a garret safe , where you may weep and meditate . no howling now nor crying loud ,
might thrive . amad . it is the kindest gentleman . fred . wee'le meet in the stable strait , there have a parting tear or two , and so farewell . mischief on my frail memory . i had forgot a written
have felt her breast ; it is soft and tender as a pellicans .— enter fredeline , with a parchment writing , and pocket inkhorn . fred . my noble captain , and my precious friend , i will not name what
most virgin - like pretending it was a crime to ask a husbands privilege : prithee leave me . fred . i dare not yet my noble injured prince . exeunt . enter castraganio , and amadine . cast . i'm glad
this , and say , it was but an old platonic trick . theand . leave me , and see him suddenly embarked . fred . sir , your command shall be obeyed ; but i beseech you not proceed to danger
unwillingly desired ? fred . it is worth my poor vexation too , when i consider how the scornful , that maligned the pure celestial sect of lovers , which you mutually conspired to raise , will smile when they shall hear
stay , stay fredeline : it is not▪ he custom of my soul , to be revenged by deputy , or fix my anger where there is not equal strength and valour to encounter it . fred . but sir , if
my behalf . fred . it is now near birth of day , and as i told you sit , to find her pensive in her bed , to draw her curtains , and reveal your self quite altered and recovered in
i wake . fred . it is strange the operation should decay so soon ; some few hours hence my subtle fume will govern in mine eyes : and there i hope continue longer then his lust hath done with him .
doce hath done working , it is well he is already married ? theand . o i am light , more nimble then a dove , or empty eagles in their mornings flight ; me thinks this sinful vestment of my flesh
prison of the fiends , it is so sulpherous and hot , me thinks they find their punishment increasde , and would to cool themselves , return unto their former hell . eurith . o direful ecstasy i can i hear this
acquaint thee with , if it were comely to reveal 't , but since i have betrayed and led thy guiltless feet into this sacred snare , it is fit t' avoid the scorns which singularity , and overbashfull niceness will beget ;
eurith . she talks as it were fit wee two . amad . should lye together , that's my meaning madam . eurith . hence , and leave us , immodest fool . amad . i knew t'would come to this– fredeline
made but one ; thus it is gen'rally received : stay eurithea , wee must talk . enter amadine . amad . madam , your bed's prepared , shall i undresse your ladyship , or the bridegroom first ? in the province where
are incident to cares , it is fit then they should sleep , prithee to bed ; shall i go call thy woman ? eurith . my lord , you are not kind : the tedious hours i could contract to minutes
bed , my eurithea , it is late . they say the married pair are incident to cares , it is fit then they should sleep , prithee to bed ; shall i go call thy woman ? eurith . my lord ,
person and his wrath . castr. it is certain loss sir , of my company . fred . how ? what's a company that bring as frail revenue , and uncertain , as our purchases at dice , who'd live , and be
hazard all . castra . it is full of danger sir . fred . i will be there my self , and stand between your person and his wrath . castr. it is certain loss sir , of my company . fred .
with thou adventure amadine , it is but ( at worst ) the forfeiture of thy poor service , which isle require , with giving thee young gridonell to be thy husband , and to rule ; my plots have so designed
sacred hand , but surely it were better ratified upon thy baulmie lip , which after absence , decent custom will , allow to those , who are delighted when they meet . ariol . your virtues have such great and safe
their grief . phyl . it is true my love : but when they see that bright perpetual traveller return , they warm and air their feathers at his beams , and sing until their gratitude hath made them hoarse . ariol
. sciolt . hah ! it is high time to were mine eyes open . he may chance in this mad fit , contract himself to some inheretrix that's landed on the high-way , whose father sells fine crab - sticks ,
to theanders marriage rites , it is strait to be performed . grid . alas , i dare not go ; there is a cause not fit to be told . sciolt . you know what's fit ! you'd best to tell
such a poor request ? it is an ill natured rogue ! come hither iaspero , have you a sister ? iasp. yes , and a pretty one , i thank my stars . grid . fetch her to me instantly ,
, i know not what it is , but i begin to feel she will be very convenient for me at this time . castr. if you'll agree upon the wedding hour . grid . how long then must i stay ?
for one month ; yet it is a chargeable place , he cannot spend less than a corronels pay in pins among these damsels , besides muffes , and fine white gloves ! poor gentleman , he lives at a great rate
it : my eyes grow sick ; it is not secure to were thy beauties thus displayed . eurith . alas , these are but couz'ning forms , there is no truth in your delays ; i know you spoke in the sincerenesse of
your commands . thean . it is now ( sweet eurithea ) in thy power to show a mercy that may save my life . slavs that are chained unto the heavy oar , who labour till they chafe the restless waves
is come , away . it is not fit your friendship should be yet begun ; go to your limbeck dear philosopher .— exit buon . theand . leisure , and drowsy sloth , did first beget these crooked and abortive thoughts
be quenched . buon . it is subtly said , but signior , now suppose the wedding past , have you no other means to prosecute your love ? fred . more cunning and sublime ! my deep designments have contrived ,
such a hope ; yet it is apt she marry too : and why ? that she may taste man , for sir , in this cold and frozen life of her virginity , there is no means to prosper my desires
your knowledge as in mine , it is eurithea . – buon . i thank you much , not for the trust you put into my breast , but for your brave ambition sir , for i affect great spirits like great wits
joints are old , and it were troublesome to rise again , my fine magical monsieur , be courtly in thy learning , embrace us , and forgive our heresy . buon . but are you reconciled ( with pious thoughts )
my prayers may ? theand it is a fire , kindled and bred in hell : for it persuades , and warmes me to a guilt : as strange and distant from my knowledge , as my will ; move on my
your grief ? theand . it is strange ; come eurithea let us walk . eurith . will you divide your troubles from my breast ? shall i not know your grief , which though my pity cannot remedy , my prayers
, pretending sacrifice , but it was to hide you in those costly mists , from rivals eyes . eurith . then with my wiser scorn i shall reply , for sweets , behold yond ' bed of violets , that lean
a fine dissembling fellow , it was not sorrow made him weape . buon . no sir , make that appear . sciolt . isle show a manuscript , now kept in the vatican that proves he had nine years a fistula in's
was at vanity ; alas , it was his disease , going to steal mushromes for his supper , the blew mouthed serpent skulked under a dock leaf , and bit him by the thumb , from whence he took that laughing malady
always laughed , pretending , it was at vanity ; alas , it was his disease , going to steal mushromes for his supper , the blew mouthed serpent skulked under a dock leaf , and bit him by the thumb , from
art , not me , it is fitter for your wonder than your mirth ; but take your course . fred . since your great master aristotle died , ( who fooled the drunken macedon out , of a thousand talents to
spirit checks my art , it was not wont to fail the strictest minute given , to make the virtue and effect appear . sciolt . this is the powder that you prized so high , as 'twere a grated carbuncle ,
rall shall serve too . it is an honest fellow , and a lover ; he may wash bucks , and scour dishes , instead of armour . arnol . is he a lover too ? grido . o i ! he
do . fred . how ? it is two full hours since the prefixed time our artist did prescribe his charm should operate ; i hope he hath not used us thus . castraganio , captain , i'd forgot : dear sir ,
the husbands charge , and it is fit ; for marriage makes him none , though she be still of the society . amad . and may besides her husband , have a sad platonicall servant to help her meditate . fred
so now , read that— it is a commission i procured the duke this morning sign , which gives you a company in's regiment garison'd at mesina : so you are now my friend and captain castraganio . cast . the latter
why signior ? fred . it is past the time two hours , when by our great physicians date , the med'cine 'gan to work . i do believe , the duke ever this hath felt some sudden difference in his maiden
get him marry her , it were a stratagem would make us rich and famous . fred . but will you bring her to him now ? castra . that's our design . fred . hast thou o'rewatch'd thy self ? art
? ariol . sir , it is excellent and free , but i am told , the next degree of happiness , the married challenge , and enjoy . thean . o she is lost ! i will go weep into the
prithee sleep a while , it is thy distemper , and i pardon it . phyl . this is strange , being married , is it not lawful sir ? theand . i grant it may be law , but is it comely
joys , but weight ; it is heavy sir , if it continue so it will break the strings . your froward sister . theand . will she not love ? i'm sure her beauty was ordained for no felicity but love ;
forgot : the medicine ; it is late , and time 'twere working in his draught : farewell : command me to the loss of fame , of treasure , and of life : dear castraganio , be but benign , and
success . castra . in truth it is pity sir . fred . there you expressed the charity and melting nature of a friend , and may administer redress , for it will much reflect within your power . castra . you cannot
( a haberdashers house ) it was ( i think ) he kept a wench . sciol . how sir , a wench▪ buon . i could say more , my friend was lewdly given . sciolt . but with your favour
stays he so long ? it is now in the ken of day . signior buonateste , have you no more of this rare magical stuff ? buon . another doce ; i came provided sir . sciol . pray give it me
fred . my lord , it is fit our castraganio give it him : he takes a rouse of corsick wine still ever he sleeps ; he , waiting in his chamber may fitly mingle and present it to him– castra :
and since it is late , it were abuse of time to read long lectures of the optics , to tell you their consent and unity , or show you through a perspective how amorists opposed in levell to each others sight ,
the eyes ; and since it is late , it were abuse of time to read long lectures of the optics , to tell you their consent and unity , or show you through a perspective how amorists opposed in levell to
would become me well ; it is not a robe of lawn , a hallowed verge , nor flowery chaplets nicely wreathed , can add prosperity to prayers , or to vows , no formal pomp , or ceremony needs to wishes
of such a word ; it is a fine kind of wearing : my new coulors have just taffeta enough to fashion such another ; would 'twere made , that i might practise how to walk in it . sciolt . i'd beat
a silver spoon , and it were found sticking in his wrist . grid . if she would fly aloft , me thinks i should so peep under her . sciolt . all these are documents of nature still . grid .
wept at midnight for it , it is a thought too dangerous for one , of's grey hayr'd friends to bear in memory . fred . his name ( if he continue ignorant o'th use of marriage thus ) must perish with himself
trust . fred . how worthy it is of grief , a prince so young , endowed with all the helps , that nature , art , or fortune need to make up perfect man , should were away the happiest season of
mistake in both : but it is because you know , you have as great a privilege to injure me , as to abuse your self . phyl . shall i be heard then when i speak , and cheerfully a little
tenderness with unkind thoughts , it is not the fortune of a day , the victors glory , when he toils to humble others pride , that he may swell his own : nor yet to lead a nation cold and naked
how ever in this world it is good to follow them , i would not fright your nice and pious mind t'unprofitable fears , castr. kind signior doubt me not . theand . thou breath into me ( mighty phylomont ) no
.— grid . i know it is fit , i give place to my elders .— sciolt . but i have business here , do you think son , i'd be so much uncivil else , as not to wait upon you
you like it not , it is music unto mine ; but son , how ere these manners are not much in use , you can be dutiful ? grid . sir i am taught , my father is my officer ,
master o'er my wish , it is now full thirteen years ( since first of tender growth ) i sent him to the camp , this letter sir , my better leisure shall survey . but pray , how is he bred
spiced . iasp. and when it is noone , your mallamucko melon of an amber scent , served in a grotto sir , to cool you lordships wishes , not your blood ; for that wee guess , hath not this many
) he says , because it is new it will take ; and be admired too , by a few : but all these easy hopes , i'd like t' have marred , with witnessing his title was so hard , 'bove half
william d'avenant . prologve . it is worth my smiles , to think what enforced ways and shifts , each poet hath to help his plays . ours now believe , the title needs must cause from the indulgent court , a
pay , shall find , it is twice a week star-chamber day . to doctor cademan , physician to the queen . for thy victorious cares , thy ready heart ; thy so small tyranny to so much art ; for visits
. to endimion porter . it is ( lord of my muse and heart ) since last thy sight inspired me , many ages past . in darkness thick as ill - met clouds can make , in sleeps wherein the last
my spirits urged , but it was easier far the torn , the injured panther , to restrain in's hot pursuit , or stroke him cool again ; to tell the cause , why winds do disagree , divide them when in
their shining heads . and it is said , th'exemplar king's your guest ; and that the rich-eyed-darling of his breast , ( to ripen all your joys ) will there become the music , odor , light , of every room
sinner must not tread : it is not to bring , a swift thanks - giving tongue , or prayers made as vehement as long , can privilege a zealous votary , to come , where the high priest should only be
; i will ( since it is to thee a sacrifice ) take care , that plenty swell not into vice : lest , by a fiery surfe_ i be led , once more to grow devout in a strange bed :
is your willing faith ; it is fit what all the kind , and wiser stars commit unto your charge , be with such eager love , and soft indeerements used , as well may prove , they meant , when first
muses share ? or how it is disposed ? and strait wee find great , pow'rfall love , hath bount 'ously resigned into your happy arms , the chief , and best , of all that our ambitious hopes possessed : your
thinking on the dead . it is fit wee seek her then ; but he that finds her out , must enter friendship with the winds ; enquire their dwelling , and uncertain walks ; whither they blow , from their forsaken
to trouble us below ? it is said your care doth govern us ; do ye call that care , to let ambassadors thus fall ? nay , and permit worse dangers to ensue ? though all your rule , and influence be
strait the rack ! for it is ten to one , this will enforce from out his pate , some secrets , that concern the english state . but o ! true , loyal heart ! he'd not one word reveal ,
it to posterity : although it is feared ( because they are left so poor ) they'll but acknowledge , what they should restore : however , since i now may erne my baize , without the taint of flattery in praise
? although not good , it is prosperous at least to imitate the greatest , not the best . know then , i must be proud ! but when i tell the cause that makes my nourished glory swell , i shall
did nourish best , because it was safe , and easy to digest : which milk , that curse on languages turned sour , for men scarce taste , what they could erst devour : since now , we are preparing to
his valour , true : it is the souldier's test ; for just so far he yields to love , he overcomes in war . endimion . but why arigo , do wee strive to raise the story of our less ,
had so much courtship in it , it was his chief sin ; yet sure , although his courtship knew the way to conquer beauty ; it did ne're betray . when wise with years , these soft affairs did cease : he whispered
. but i recant : it is fit you morn a while , and wink , until you darken all this isle ; more fit , the bay should wither too , and be quite lost , than he deprived your obsequy
he wore the baize . it was he reduced evadne from her scorn , and taught the sad aspasia how to morn ; gave arethusa's love , a glad relief ; and made panthea elegant in grief . if these great trophies
, in your disdain . it is strange you stir not yet ; not all this while lift up your fans , to hide a scornful smile : whisper , nor jog your lords to steal away ; so leave us t'act
; and bashfully they blush when first it is seen : as if to spread their beauty were a crime ; a fault in them , not in all - ripening - time . so stands ( hidden with veils ) in all her
is yet their own ; it is ours but in expectance , whilst they are greene ; and bashfully they blush when first it is seen : as if to spread their beauty were a crime ; a fault in them , not in
it is yet their own ; it is ours but in expectance , whilst they are greene ; and bashfully they blush when first it is seen : as if to spread their beauty were a crime ; a fault
hopes of wealth discerned , it is hard to say how gladly reason did my faith obey ; as if that miracle would now appear , which turns a poet to an usurer : but reason soon will with our faith conspire
it must destroy ; although it was severely just to those , so much perverted in their will ; the righteous saw the fire , yet feared no ill . so careless safe , here all the natives were , who stood
assume , or kindle till it is fit , it should consume : heavens slow , unwilling fire ; that would not fall , 'till two injurious cities seemed to call with their loud sins ; and when t'was time it must
they force to flow : it is repulse makes rivers swell , and he forced back , got courage from our victory : rivers , that seas do teach to rage , are tossed , and troubled for their pride , then
be taught to fly ! it is lawful then to say , thou did appear to wonder much , although thou could not fear : thy knowledge ( prince ) were younger than thy time , of not amazed ; to see
foretold a danger just when it was come : when strait mine eye , might ratify mine ear ; and see that true , which heard , was but my fear : for in a firm well ordered body stood , erected
whose concord makes a jar it is noise in peace , though harmony in war : the drum ; whose doubtful music doth delight the willing ear , and the unwilling fright . had wet orion chosen to lament his griefs at
enter florello . altamont . it was meruolle's care thus to assure thy mistress real love , and constancy ere thou should give too much of thine away . but now receive her from alteza's hand . — alteza . charintha ,
with a harmless plight ? charintha. it is sincere , as holy hermits vows , and true , as their confession at their death . meruolle . appear florello , and receive thy doom . enter florello . altamont . it was meruolle's
dandolo the motion i d_slike , it is dangerous . florello . have you three throats , can you revive as oft as you are killed , to take new punishment , that thus you mutiny against kind reason ? dandolo . these
th'esteeme of humane quali_ie ; it is fit your altamont we strive to raise , aboue the charity or skill of praise . enter florello , rossa , molard , in their old habits , dandolo , stoccata , punto , bound
prostrate at your feet— and it is the last memorial of his love . alteza . ambiguous history ! he conqueror , yet this the last memorial of his love ! mer . wise heaven did mock your altamont : for whilst
, but sorrows spy , it is not safe to know . enter meruolle . meruolle . howl , howl , until you wake the inhabitants of graves ! till you disquiet all the spheres ; and put harmonious nature out of
i will perform . and it is to know the rigour of thy might , what wondrous flame and spirits do possess thy spacious breast . sciolto . there's relish of intent ! altamont . i'd learn the providence and justice of
now they cheapen blood : it is spilt to punish the example , not the guilt . religion too , on our italian earth , grows like the cedar big and high ; but yields no fruit . the abject race of
but now , i find it was with thy consent procured . you've struggled in each others lust . all now is evident as light . scoperta . i bring my innocence , to'th'cleere survey of heaven . altamont . though dull
strict survey of's nose ; it is so like altamonts . charintha. he is already so exhaust , that his wise bounty can no more be argument for wit : and now to have this plea for his dismission is aboue my
your defence . but sir , it is sober patience makes vs safe . if now on eithers haunch you did confer a kick ; our secret wisdom would direct vs how to bear it for the time , and in our own
would avoid my haunts . it is not for my credit , nor yet for our dead fathers , thus to make your person known , being you're illegitimate begot , by the motion of the evil spirit . @ go ,
enter altamont . alta . it is alteza , i know her sinful voice , — ( she kneeles . ) alteza . o sir , if anguish , or distress , can make , an humble heart , behold your lady
a blew cabbage ; and it is contracted now to one , oblique wrinkle . alteza . villain , thou lie . sciolto . thy aged skull in stead of hair oregrowne with moss , and looks as if it had bin ,
ne'er merited my wrath . it is the wit the policy of sin , to hate those men we have abused . when first i spied the grace and lustre of thy shape ; me thought i loved , and my sick
. alteza . charintha , it is some stratagem ; but if he jewels bring , and in a hand as large , and open as yon'easy snypes , thou hast ill luck if thou constrain him not to loss . charintha·
— exit . altamont . it is a cunning , and promiscuous slave . this story of alteza's abstinence , he doth but counterfeit , to gull my sight . meruolle . had the devil himself crep't into flesh , and undertook
your expectation here . besognia . it is he madam , and such a he as must be only likened to himself . charintha. more rich , and gaudie then the east . so liberal too , that you would think he natures
. signior dandolo ! why it is yet a month ere he should meet your expectation here . besognia . it is he madam , and such a he as must be only likened to himself . charintha. more rich , and gaudie
of the mighty grape . it is precious as the milk of queens ; such as would teach dull saturne laugh . it magnifies the heart , and makes the agill spirits dance , it drownds all thoughts adulterate and sad ;
service up , as if it were the haunch of her dead husband . rossa . i am entire flame ! florello . the geographicke captain shall no more study the town map , that's dark walks may be contrived through slender
bag . florello . sir it is fit your blessings were encreasd ; and that your wife had read your worth . altamont . my art betrays my hopes , or i have found a remedy to cure her pride : your
storm can't last , because it is still more violent . sh'ath tan caroch for the palace , and means strait to disgrace me to the duke by her complaints . meruolle . her veins oreflow with gall ! altamont . florello
hand ! alte . there— it is to reach back the heart i gave ye— altamont . you spirits that secure the property of humane love , be still official here ! why should we not for ever thus remain , incorporate
own snare . cast . it is forest sure . let's make safe work kill lothario , lay him by him , and depart , cos . a match . loath . o villains , o , o , o. luthario dies
tell 'em of castruchio . it is best to o'retake 'em . i cannot guess which way they went . exit the other way . enter castruchio , lothario , cosimo . cast . hell , and the pillary take such dull
in sufferance . luin . and it is my duty sir , to be most prompt in the observance . fores , my lord ! lucio . a rude summons , that calls me as a judge , to censure on the errors
forgive me gentle girl . it was the first bargain we did make in the ' church , to share in sufferance . luin . and it is my duty sir , to be most prompt in the observance . fores , my lord
friend . t'was ill , it was not the right way . a true roman now , would walk aside , and with his own sword dismiss his own soul : and not permit moisture in youthful eyes , thus to disgrace
think upon it thy self . it is not kindly done : i should not have used you thus— fores . o my dear lord ! where did i loose your heart ? i am overcome at these expressions . i cannot weep
not well , in troth it is not . employ thy own heart : think upon it thy self . it is not kindly done : i should not have used you thus— fores . o my dear lord ! where did i loose
to thy friends prejudice ? it is not well , in troth it is not . employ thy own heart : think upon it thy self . it is not kindly done : i should not have used you thus— fores . o my
estranged from knowledge , then it was before . yet by the rules of lawful notion : it goes well with her : for she was ever given to prayer : superstitious in humility : and even unthrifty in her charity .
no , my stars , it is too much to bear , though i were stomached like an ostrich , yet could i not digest such hard dealing . my wife defiled , corsa ravished . the count abused where satisfaction is
my sufferance is tired . it is an old inconstancy in fate , soon to erect , and soon to ruinate . exit . a chair at the arras . actus quintus . scena prima . enter forest solves . forest ,
that admits of help , but it is never cured . and so the fatal jars tweene man , and wife , if secret kept , dissension falls asleep . but if once known to fame ; fame talks so loud she wakes
in more regard then now it is . all former interest is quit forgot . fores . mark , did not i suspect , she would begin her charms again . away with her . luin . o stay , now ,
made of silk : and it is a subtle whore , she knows it well enough . but come , be brief . charm me not with stories of my former love between vs . i see thee as thou art ,
nothing , i : yet it is enough i feel the wrong , if ignorant , i suffer twice . and therefore let me know my enemy . the little worm , when trod upon ; will turn his head , to
that's my intent . for it were dull humanity to aim no farther then his life . i'le pursue him even to hell . cast . and let me alone so to facilitate the project , by search of fit time ,
rest of his body . it is no chamber , but a court . cupboard . cos . but they make him amends in his diet . bora . they cannot sir , for he's a faint eater , if he would
duke last gave me . it was to him a new , and unknown star : and comet like , employed his thoughts with such astrology as made an optic of his jealousy ; through which , he would discern the cause
. custom to abuse . it was my business not disrespect of you , that did deprive my complement of vanity . i shall rejoice when i can show you kindness . dorid . i will be bold to think so .
a means more absolute ; it is true , forest does all : but how ? as th'instrument governed in the ' workman's hand . instruct me with conueniency of time , and i will work the duke in thy behalf . dor
dorido is it you ? it is much to see you appear before the sun . dor . faith signior ; the count being out o' town i though forest would have more leisure to peruse my new suit . he's early
have but one life , it is some error in your grace , thus t'oblige me to the loss of more , in your dear service . duke . i am not skil'd in words . but i affect thy fury .
a courtier long ; but whether it was want of skill in me to choose a man , or want of luck in thee to be my choice ; suspense makes neutral . but know ; my love was tardy , because still
making sorrow swift , because it is mortal . let me waite , on your lordship to your horse , and at your better leisure read this same . i'le tell ye as we go , who brought it me . exeunt
now we are private , it is a fit time to be troublesome— loath . i'le cram cerberus , with sopps made of the slaves blood— bora . concerning those offices . i'ue thought on 'em . and will have 'em all
you know besides how harsh it is to chide with majesty , or slight princes favours . corsa . i'le show to my lord . luin . i had thought t'haue shown my husband mine too but since it is capable of curious
the twain , corsa . it is . but truly i mislike the manner of the gift . dost thou think his thoughts are honourable ? i prithee tell me ? luin . they are such as i suspected at the first ,
, and your acceptance , it is your own . chair at the arras . gent. noble signior , i'le put ye to the test . fores . princes letters are c_e_per far then those which scriveners put to sale . if
, and i am made— it is short , pray heaven it be sweet , or i'le ne'er love the proverb. lucio . sir , have you ever bin in service , under any eminent commander ? gent. never yet . lucio
to get reward for subtlety ; it is now . we take notice ( lucio ) she is thy wife , and thy sister our forest . fores . lucio . we your graces humblest creatures . fores . affection is become a
! lucio , prepare . it is our will to make thy wife a courtier ; she shall be high in favour ; if she'll leave her modesty ; that's out of fashion now : in neighbour courts , the ladies so
to sin . duke . it is faithfully observed . fores . swelled with uncharitable pride : such as admits no stile of neighbour ; as if grown aboue the use of friendship . they seem to call those mighty ilanders nearest
accused as a vice , it is known indeed the french do take a prides , in the emphasis of sudden anger , as if alacrity in ill did make , the fault look handsomely , and dullness add deformity to sin
the womb of greatness . it is not our faults . each man obayes his star , in spite of his teeth , dor . all this is alcaron . bora . one thing grieves me . i'ue a bad memory already
you then ? corsa . it is a folly in my eyes . i know not why they weep : unless they weep because they now have lost their liberty ; heretofore each man , which chance presented , was to them
well deserved . luin , it was my tongues last employment . fores i would have her were her growing fortunes , in a handsome fashion : do but observe the vnpollish'd garb of city dames : of those whom _athers purse-strings
certefie the world how strong it is . forest . i was assured before . this is the time , in which i shall oblige posterity or fall ( my wench ) by flattering error . hast thou to my sister counsel
simper invitation . luin . it is not fit i apprehend you now , but i wish that you would know ; my duty is so well preserved from all corruption : which either youth : or foul example might produce :
then a comical continuance . it is a levity too humble in a prince to heed such trifles . cos . nay — prithee lead the way . exeunt omnes . actus secundus . scena prima . enter forests and lvinna. fores
my glorious boy . lucio it is their humble skill not to arrive before your grace , but by an advocate a mediator blessed in your eyes . duke how apt am i to love ! yet now observe unkindness in my
lucio shut the door ! it is the plague of greatness , the curse of pomp , that in our darkest privacy , wee must even public be to every mans affairs . how now ! all these saucy troops of brawling
thy chronicler . lucio . it were ( sir ) but ingratitude in me to lessen thus , the number sanctifide of your true friends . be you pleased to sheath it , in that same part , which you do most
bad me tell your grace it was a deed of charity to think him worthy of this same great employment . and this letter he humbly recommends to your perusal . duke reads the letter to himself . cast . how can
your prince and country . it was likewise appointed to be the public voice of thanksgiving for your vniverfity ( though she never spake weaker then by so mean an instrument ) and therefore is accountable to your grace to whom under
move their settled conscience . it was a material consideration , because they ever did and still do fill the world with outcries against our laws for making a rape upon their consciences , have printed catalogues of their english martyrs ,
yet believe it . for it is so apparently destructive of our dear master his royal laws of charity & obedience , that i must not be so uncharitable as to think they speak their own mind truly , when they profess
a strict inquisition i fond it was apprehended as a business ( perhaps full of danger to their bodies , but ) advantageous to their souls , consonant to the obligation of all christians , and meritorious of an exceeding weight of
self as by what means it was possible for the devil to gain so strong a party in men's resolutions , as to move them to undertake a business so abhorring from christianity , so evidently full of extreme danger to their
story the highest cruelty as it was fancied by the most hieroglyphicall egyptian , this alone would weigh them down , as if the alps were put in scale against the dust of a balance . for had this accursed treason prospered
herods master-piece at ramah as it was deciphred by the tears and sad threnes of the matrons in an universal mourning for the loss of their pretty infants , yet this of herod will prove but an infant wickedness , and there
only retain this clause , it is not in the bibles of the church of rome ] and really these romano - barbari could never pretend to any precedent for an act so barbarous as theirs . adrimelech indeed killed a king
their own and gunpowder , it is odds but then we may be consumed indeed , and so did they , their fire was not from heaven . lastly , it was a fire so strange , that it had no example
its possibility . secondly , it was fire indeed they called for , but not like that in my text , not fire from heaven , they might have called as long and as loud as those priests did , who contested
and had its object . it was the fittest instrument for merciless men , men of no bowels whose malice like their instrument did agere ad extremum suarnm virium , work to the highest of its possibility . secondly , it was
but to the question : it was fire they called for . the most merciless of all the elements . no possibility of relenting when once kindled and had its object . it was the fittest instrument for merciless men , men
samaria , in our case it was more ; of the fate of a whole kingdom . it had been well if such a question had been silenced by a direct negative or ( as the judges of the areopage used to
in the day , but it was christ the lord in my text . the question it self follows . shall we command fire to come from heaven and consume them ? the question was concerning the fate of a whole town
inconvenient to be published , it is not fit the world should know all , therefore , some they might , or else he had said nothing . the reason which he gives makes the business somewhat clearer , for he derives
be so required , so it were not a publication of all . non enim omnium @ sunt peccata ; saith s. leo , some sins are inconvenient to be published , it is not fit the world should know all ,
it might be done so it were not required and exacted , and yet might be so required , so it were not a publication of all . non enim omnium @ sunt peccata ; saith s. leo , some sins are
church . now see how it is uttered , and it will sufficiently inform us both of the practise and the opinion which antiquity had of the obligation to the seal . illam contra apostolicam regulam praesumptionem , &c. that is ,
before the congregation , as it is confessed in the council of mentz , and inserted by burchard into his decree . but when the lay piety began to cool , and the zeal of some clergy men wax too hot ,
a whole assembly . thus it was in the greek church both law and custom . but now if we look into the latin church wee shall find that it was taken up from example of the greeks and some while practised
divine commandment , for if it were , the penitent could not give the priest license to break it . but if the penitent may give his confessor leave , because the tie of secrecy is a bond in which the priest
to reveal his confession . it is the doctrine of scotus , durandus , almain , navarre , medina , and generally of all the thomists . i infer , if a private man may licence his confessor to reveal his concession
their own general confession . it is a rule amongst them , haeresis est crimen quod non confessio celat . now i would fain learn why treason is not as revealeable as heresy ? is heresy dangerous to souls ? then surely
so that at most , it is but a doubtful matter in such cases , whether the tie of secrecy doth oblige . now if for the proof of marriage the seal may be broken up , that man and wife might
doubtful case of marriage . it is the opinion of many great canonists , as you may see them quoted by suarez de paz . and @ , and the case of the venetian who married a virgin that was both his
nay if one dissent , it is enough to destroy a consent . but see farther . there are many cases , generally confessed amongst themselves , in which the seal of formal and ( as they love to speak ) sacramental
present catholic church . for it is no more a begging of the question ( nor apparently so much ) to say , the church of england is a part of the catholic church , and therefore her consent is required to
religiously to be kept ; it is true , but concludes no more , but that it must be a greater cause that must authorize a publication of this , then of the secrets of ordinary commerce between friend and friend .
and such a secret , it is the more closely and religiously to be kept ; it is true , but concludes no more , but that it must be a greater cause that must authorize a publication of this , then
for first , if because it is delivered as a secret , and such a secret , it is the more closely and religiously to be kept ; it is true , but concludes no more , but that it must be
as that in no case it is to be broken up , and if in any , especially it may be opened in the case of treason . i never knew any thing cried up with so general avoyce upon so little
they . i am sure it is ridiculous in any man to confess and shrive himself of a good action , and that this was such in their opinion , it's plain , by that impious answer of garnet , affirming it
manuals and penitentiary books . it is culpable say they . i am sure it is ridiculous in any man to confess and shrive himself of a good action , and that this was such in their opinion , it's plain ,
most commonly received . 3 it was not only not repented of , but by them reputed to be a good action , and so could not be a matter of confession . i appeal to any of their own manuals and
of their own side . it is the doctrine of hostiensis : and navarre , and cardinal alban confess it to be most commonly received . 3 it was not only not repented of , but by them reputed to be a
their penitential judicature , because it was a fact not repented of , but then in agitation , and resolved upon for the future . how then could this be a confession , whose institution must certainly be in order to absolution
consilij pettendi causâ . 2 it was propounded to these fathers confessors as a thing not subjicible to their penitential judicature , because it was a fact not repented of , but then in agitation , and resolved upon for the future
bind to the seal . it is the common opinion of their own doctors : non enim inducitur obligatio sigilli in confessione quam quis facit sine ullo animo accipiendi absolutionem , sed solum consilij pettendi causâ . 2 it was propounded to
only a word . 1 it was only propounded to them in way of question or consultation ( like this in the text ) as appeared by their own confessions , and the attestation of then sr henry mountague recorder of london
be lawful . for true it is god commanded us , saying , thou shalt not kill , that is , if thou art not able to lift up thy hand , or strike a stroke ; thou shalt not blaspheme ,
they could not , therefore it was not lawful for them to go about it , nor is it for us in the same case , especially if the prince hath quiet possession , and a strong guard about him , then
their enemies : not because it was simply unlawful so to do , or any way adverse to the precepts of christ , but because they wanted power . so bellarmine : the church gave leave that the faithful should obey iulian
for the world , unless it were by persuading the emperors to the christian faith . wee pray for all our governors , that they might have long life , a secure government , a safe house , strong armies , good
or kill a king . it is the proper cognisance of mahumetanisme , by fire and sword to maintain their cause , and to propagate their religion , by ruin of princes and conquering their kingdoms . but it is the excellency
addicted to blood , unless it were to shed his own . he was a prince of peace and set forth to us by all the symboles of peace and gentleness , as of a sheep , a lamb , a hen
this was not likely , it was too strange a question to ask of such a mr. a magistre @@ crudelitatis ? nothing could have come more cross to his disposition . his spirit never was addicted to blood , unless it
, they said lord ] it was well they asked at all , and would not too hastily act what they too suddēlie had intended , but it was better that they asked christ , it had been the best warrant they
remain in the same state it is , and our princes still exposed to so extreme hazards , or else let his holiness seat himself in his chair , condemn these doctrines , vow against their future practise , limit his ordo
contrary . for first , it is known he hath claimed the kingdom of england , as feudatary to the see apostolike . which when i considered i wondered not at that new and insolent title which mosconius gives his holiness of
heresy to do so , it is in their account as bad , for so the iesuits in their veritas defensa against the action of arnald the advocate affirm in terminis , that the actions of some kings of france against the
became @ , saying , it was sentenced to the fire before it had escaped the press . and good reason , nihil enim tale à patribus societatis didicit . good men , they never taught him any such doctrine as is
in the world , when it is requisite to the end of the spiritual power . the words are plain that he may do it for his own ends ( for his is the spiritual power ) that is , for the
expresses it handsomely , and it is the doctrine of their great aquinas . the pope ( saith he ) by his spiritual power may dispose of the temporalties of all the christians in the world , when it is requisite to
pretences then actual heresy . it is a large title , and may do any thing . bellarmine expresses it handsomely , and it is the doctrine of their great aquinas . the pope ( saith he ) by his spiritual power
. for all this , it were some ease , if here we might fix a @ . for perhaps these princes might put in a @ for themselves , and go near to prove themselves to be no heretics . all'sone
my first part i showed it was too catholic a doctrine , and too much practised by the great cisalpine prelate . i add no more , least truth it self should blush , fearing to become incredible . now if we
religion , at the best it was full of danger if not certain ruin . but i will no more rake this augaean stable , in my first part i showed it was too catholic a doctrine , and too much practised
( whosesoever it be ) it is then without question lawful to kill him , and the most that ever they say is , that it is indeed not lawful to kill a king , not lawful for a private man ,
any man ; for so it is determined in an apology made for chastel , licitum esse privatis & singulis reges & principes hareseos & tyrannidis condemnatos occidere , non obstante decreto concilij constantiensis ; and the author of the book de
pope commands it , then it is iudicium publicum , and so they are never the more secure for all this . secondly , because @ tells us , that this decree is nothing . @ id decretum ( concilij @ )
the procurement of gerson , it was decreed in the council of constance , that tyranny was no sufficient cause for a man to kill a prince . but yet i find that even this decree will not stand princes in much
doctrine : but here indeed it is so immediate and natural a consequent of the former that it must not be dissembled . but what shall we think if even this blasphemy be taught in terminis ? see this too . in
generally , i am sure it is as confidently taught as the former , and by as great doctors . @@ erraret si admitteret aliquem regem , qui vellet impunè fovere quamlibet sectam , & @@ . so bellarmine . and again
that are heretical , but it is necessary , and the catholiks are bound to do it sub mortali. i know not whether it be so generally , i am sure it is as confidently taught as the former , and by
leading authors . you see it is good divinity amongst them , and i have made it good that it is a general opinion received by all their side if you will believe themselves and now let us see if it will
non est iesuitarum propria , it is not theirs alone , sed ut garnettus respondit , totius ecclesiae , & quidem ab antiquissimis temporibus consensione recepta doctrina nostra est , and there he reckons up seven and twenty famous authors of the
sr edward cooke for saying it is the doctrine of the iesuits . do they then deny it ? no surely , but non est iesuitarum propria , it is not theirs alone , sed ut garnettus respondit , totius ecclesiae ,
they aimed at . but it is so foul a calumny , i am ashamed to stand longer to efute it . the proceedings of the church and state of england were just , honourable and religious , full of mercy and
were born in england . it was not treason for a french priest to be in england , but yet so it must have been if religion had been the thing they aimed at . but it is so foul a calumny ,
plead exemption . secondly , it was but reasonable , in case they obeyed not the proscriptiō , their disobedience should be made capital . for if they did not obey , then either they sinned against their conscience in disobeying their
, as it is plain it is taught by these leading authors , i mean sà and bellarmine , i know no reason but it may be very just and most convenient to deny those men the country from whose laws they
be their doctrine , as it is plain it is taught by these leading authors , i mean sà and bellarmine , i know no reason but it may be very just and most convenient to deny those men the country from
in the edition of paris it was left out . the cause is known to every man : for that it was merely to serve their ends is apparent ; for their french freedom was there taken from them , they durst
mean this clause [ as it is well @ , and @ been of a long time known . ] the popes encroachments upon the state of england had been an old sore , and by its eld almost habituate ; but
, any more then now it is with us : but whether this will convince any man of reason i leave it to himself to consider . but one thing is observable in that act of parliament of richard the second ,
show anon ) but then it was not with them , any more then now it is with us : but whether this will convince any man of reason i leave it to himself to consider . but one thing is observable
pretended religion , for if it was not against religion then , why is it now ? i confess there is a reason for it , to wit , because now the popes power is an article of faith ( as i
of his regalty , as it is well known and hath been of a long time known , ] and therefore they protested [ together and every one @ by himself , that they would be with the same crown and regalty
their part . 2 . it was but reasonable , in case they obeyed not the proscription , their stay should be made treason . 1 . because the priests did generally preach the popes power either directly over temporalls , or
cause , if suffered ; it was made treason to be a priest , or at least if any of their priests should be found in england he should be adjudged a traitor , and these laws were not yet repealed ,
good subjects , and then it was not religion , at least not christian , that was inconsistent with their loyalty , & so hitherto inrespect of us , their machination was altogether causeless . 2 . for the second ( of
religion or conscience , unless it were against their conscience to be good subjects , and then it was not religion , at least not christian , that was inconsistent with their loyalty , & so hitherto inrespect of us , their
away ; i speak how it is in the case of princes , ( and i shall anon prove it ) for they being public persons from whose deposition more may be gotten , are like to suffer more , ut ex
against her . i confess it is no good argument of it self , to say , the pope might excommunicate the queen , therefore depose her from her kingdom ; but this concludes with them sufficiently , with whom excommunication not
reasons . 1 . because it is plain religion did not make them absent themselves from our churches , unless they had changed their religion since the bull came over . for if religion could consist with their communion with us before
this statute was made if it was possible to nullify the effects of it , to hinder its execution , and if it might be , by this means to keep them , as they had been before , in communion with
quibus vitae periculum attulimus ? it was nazianzen's question to the apostate . give me leave to consider it as appliable to our present case , and try if i can make a just discovery of the cause that moved these traitors
coldness in religion , so it is as ordinary for a pretence of religion to make cold charity . the present case of the disciples and the same spirit which , for the same @ cause , is takenup by the persons
violence . and therefore as it is ordinary for charity to be called coldness in religion , so it is as ordinary for a pretence of religion to make cold charity . the present case of the disciples and the same spirit
so much abomination . ) it is of it self too bad . if his holiness be wronged in the business i have no hand in it ; the speech was printed at paris three months after the murder of the king
not been interposed . however it is no thank to his holiness , his spirit blew high enough . but i will open this secret no farther , if i may have but leave to instance once more . if i mistake
seminaries are sufficiently known , it was as a praeludium or warning peace to the great fougade , the discharge of the powder treason ; briefly , the case was so , that after the publication of the bull of pius quintus
should throw him out . it was but a reasonable collection . i shall not need to instance in the effects which this bull produced ; the treason of watson & cleark ; two english seminaries are sufficiently known , it was
for his purpose , for it was ( if not author ) yet the main encouragor of catesby to the powder treason . for when garnet would willingly have known the popes mind in the business , catesby eased him of the
extremely magnify , and indeed it was for his purpose , for it was ( if not author ) yet the main encouragor of catesby to the powder treason . for when garnet would willingly have known the popes mind in the
of the popes design , it was to take her life away , in case she would not turn , roman catholic . to achieve this , because no legate could come into england , nor any public messenger from the see
monk of colein , as it is reported by the excellent thuanus . not much less then this is that of baronius , just i am sure of the same spirit with james and john , for he calls for a ruin
against them ; and when it is done , done so coldly in their reprehensions with a greater readiness to excuse all , then condemn any , i say these things to a considering man do increase the suspicion if at least
approbations and other solemn privileges it was printed at toledo and montz ; and lastly inserted into the catalogues of the books of their order by petrus ribadineira . what negligence is sufficient that such a doctrine as this should pass so
, else i am sure it is not very likely he should have been dissuaded from his purpose by reading in mariana that it was lawful to do what he intended . 3 . i add they not only thought it innocent
emanuel sà affirmed ) but it is sufficient proof of his being a tyrant if learned men , though but few , and those seditious too do but murmure it , or begin to call him so . i hope this doctrine
garments of his prince . it was the old laudable custom of the moors of spain . 3 . he adds examples of the business , telling us that this was the device , to wit , by poisoned boots , that
. after such an avisamente it is now the ordinary received manual for the fathers confessors of the iesuits order . this doctrine , although — la res digna sepulchri — yet is nothing if compared with mariana . for 1 .
his pen by inadvertence ; it was not made public , until after forty years deliberation , as himself testifies in his preface . 2 . after such an avisamente it is now the ordinary received manual for the fathers confessors of
so they might , and it were no way unlawful for them to bear arms to propagate religion , had they not wanted an opportunity ; if you believe the same author : for fighting is proper for s. peter and his
manner spoils all . for it is not well done unless a warlike captain be appointed by christs vicar to bear a crusade in a field of blood . and if the other apostles did not proceed such an angry way as
boanerges of my text . it is an act of faith , by faith to conquer the enemies of god and holy church , saith sanders our countryman . hitherto nothing but well ; if james and john had offered to do
retaliate evil with evil , it was a doctrine they could not read in the killing letter of the law . there they might meet with precedents of revenge and anger of a high severity , an eye for an eye ,
height of a revenge . it is the doctrine of s. hierome and titus bostrensis ; the law had been their school-master , and taught them the rules of justice both punitive and vindictive : but christ was the first that taught
, and unchristian conversation : it was a received use and custom heretofore , for men in times of grief , of sorrow , and affliction , to poll their heads , and cut their hair , as authors , and the
all eternity : yea , it is such a comeliness as will supply , conceal , adorn , and grace all corporal deformities , and take them clean away : whereas all corporal , and external beauty , is but mere deformity
others : but likewise because it was a _adge and character of effeminacy : clemens alexandrinus condemns all such , for androginous , and effeminate persons , who curl , and crisp their hair like women : tertullian , chrysostome , cyprian
excommunication : not only because it was a pomp and vanity of the world , which christians have renounced in their baptism , and a mere bait to inamor , and inescate others : but likewise because it was a _adge and
and misbeseemes all christians . it is a great disparagement and shame to men ; especially , to christians , to be effeminate and womanish in any thing : much more in the over - curious , delicate , and vain -
goddess lucina ; from whence it was called , lotus capillata , or the hairy lote - tree : witness , a monastery of religio_s virgins in mexico , who had their hair cut : witness , monicha the daughter of sanctius
were of all others . it was a mere mistake , and error in lycurgus , who taught the lacede_onian young men to nourish their hair at the full length , because if they were beautiful , it would make them more
man have long hair , it is so far from being a grace , or ornament , that it is a shame unto him : with which the fathers , and others do concur . who dares then be so impudently bold
, and shaeme : because it is a publishing , and proclaiming of their sin , with impudence , and shamefulnesse , as sodom did : which is the very highest pitch , and strain of all iniquity ; and will bring
, and abominable : because it is a glorying , and triumphing in those sins , and vices , which should be their sorrow , grief , and shaeme : because it is a publishing , and proclaiming of their sin ,
lives , then lockes ? it is storied of one clotilde , a queen of france , that she chose rather to have the heads of young sons cut off , then to suffer them to be bold , or shaven ,
to nourish it , since it is now so costly , and expensiue unto divers : how many hundreds are there now among v_ , whose heads are almost as chargeable , and expensiue to them , as their backs , or
members of it ? undoubtedly it is . wherefore , wee may justly say of all our impudent , ruffianly , and shameles_e love - locke fosterers , ( who are odious , and blame - worthy , even in this respect
in the margent testify : it was noted as a point of shamelessness , and singularity in nero , though an emperor ; that he oftentimes wore his hair combed backward into his poll , in an affected , and over curious
or aduenticious locke , because it is contrary to the word of god , and law of nature : which is my third , but not my meanest argument , against these love - lockes . fourthly . that which is an
work of god : because it is but a mere invention , work , and figment of the devil : because it savours of pride , lasciuio_snesse , effeminacy , vanity , and self - seeking : and doth as much as
the nazarites did ; because it is against the law of god , and nature : love - lockes , a_d excessive long hair beyond the ordinary , grave , and decent length , are both against the laws of god ,
cut their hair , because it is a shame for a man to nourish it : so that by these authorities , to omit others , the wearing of excessive long hair , or love - lockes , is directly contrary to
law of god ; because it is given to women by the constitution of god , and nature , ( which ought not to be violated , ) for a covering , and for a ba_ge , and token of subjection :
at any time , because it is contrary to the order of nature , and the law of god ; because it is given to women by the constitution of god , and nature , ( which ought not to be violated
with an hairelace , because it is effeminate , and contrary to the law of god . clemens alexandrinus , as he doth utterly condemn the colouring , powdering , frizeling , curling , and effeminate , and meretricious dressing , adorning
of our country ? doubtless it is . if then nature doth teach men thus to cut their hair : the nourishing of womanish , and long unshorn hair , together with the reservation of these effeminate , fantastic , ridiculous ,
a shame to men ; it is the natural , and proper glory of none but women , to whom god , and nature have beque_ thed it for a special use ; to wit , for a natural covering , or
glory to her , for it is given to her for a covering : the apostle here informed vs ; that the nourishing , and wearing of long hair in men , is contrary to nature : and he confirms this assertion
woman have long hair , it is a glory to her , for it is given to her for a covering : the apostle here informed vs ; that the nourishing , and wearing of long hair in men , is contrary
man have long hair , it is a shame unto him ? but if a woman have long hair , it is a glory to her , for it is given to her for a covering : the apostle here informed vs
of god : even so it is directly contrary to the law of nature which no custom can control : which i prove , fi_st , by the express testimony of the scriptures : doth not nature it self teach you (
evidence by sundry testimonies : it is storied of the effeminate , luxurious , and heathenish sybaerites ; that it was the common custom of their city , for their youths and pages to were , and nourish love - lockes tied
of late degenerated from what it was in former ages : how far their lives , and their professions differ . we all profess our selves te be heroical , generous , and true - bred english-men , yea zealous , down
and chiefest glory . strange it is to see , and lamentable to consider , how far our nation is of late degenerated from what it was in former ages : how far their lives , and their professions differ . we
it , no not when it is administered , unless there be a crucifix then standing on or over the altar ) and to reduce us back again to rome ) now crucify him daily in their new erected crosses and crucifixes
their bishopprickes , what right it is ? a quare impedit ; to force them to show good cause , why they hinder ministers from preaching to their people , and prohibit those to hear sermons abroad , who have none at
till next sessions , because it was a new case . he answered , the case was plain , and that he must by the statute indite him this sessions or not at all . then they fall to persuade the jury
the skin hanged up . it were a goodly sign , the sign of the judges skin . and certainly till the skins of some of these spiritual devil - judges be fleyde off , and their necks graced with a tiburne
c. 1 . and therefore it was void in law , neither would nor could he in point of loyally to his majesty obey it , being not made by his authority . whereupon the church-wardens left him . nucoman hereupon bids
for orthodox law , as it is , and executed on our audacious innovators , convicted of high treason by it . finis . a postscript. christian reader , since the finishing of this treatise a memorable story hath fallen out in
with them and us . it is not for christians ; much less for ministers , to redeem outward peace and liberty at so dear a price as the hazard of the blood of so many precious souls , especially of our
or of their governors . it is true , by forbearing obedience to those commandments we offend the spirits of our governors , and make them to be ( though causelessly ) offended with us ; but by yielding obedience to these
no stead ; for , it is certain , peter did not account them as necessary , he knew the contrary , nor did he so use them himself , nor so compel others to them ; but , knowing his liberty
initio . from the beginning it was not so : but the synod at jerusalem reached their authority no farther then to lay commandments upon the disciples only touching necessary things , acts 15 . 28 . necessary ( i say )
nunquam venit in actum . it is a true axiom , and pertinent to that we speak off . 2 . secondly , i say , that the apostle himself doth clear the point , when he confesses he did thus accommodate
. 21 . objection . it is wont to be excepted against them , that christian liberty stands not in the freedom of outward actions , but in the freedom of conscience . as long therefore as there is no doctrinall necessity
the like . secondly , it is one thing to command a particular person , who may owe himself to a church - governor , as philemon did to paul : another thing to command , yea to give a standing command
, whilst the eating of it was offensive to the iewes . now , for such things as are necessary and @ , church - governors have power to give order and commandment concerning them . as did the sinod at jerusalem
guided by these patterns . it is not fit for them ( i say ) to give for the ground of their proceedings , their own wisdom and pleasure , but it be hooves them to justify their doings therein frō such
part , i mean , it is their duty ; their place and authority requires it , not that they always have a power and spirit of discerning to judge a right in this case ; for , it seems , the
, when i say , it is their part , i mean , it is their duty ; their place and authority requires it , not that they always have a power and spirit of discerning to judge a right in this
done decently & orderly ; it is therefore their part in eminent measure to be able to discern and judge what is decent and undecent , what is orderly & disorderly . now , when i say , it is their part
he name the place whereon it was set : the table of the lord , and the contemners thereof , guilty of the body and blood of the lord ; and thereupon did denounce the vengeance & plague , which fell upon
, that the place whereon it is celebrated , is not called an altar of the lord , seeing the spirit of god , by his apostle hath dignified it with as equivalent attributes ; for the apostle , as he called
of some saint , and it is thought so much the more holy , by how much the more beautiful . men run to kiss it , they are invited to enrich it , and more are astonished at things curious ,
the word of god , it is like gold 7 . times purified in the fire . vvouldst have a beast to slay ? mortify and kill thy beastly affections , which otherwise would kill thee . vvantest thou a knife to
the primitive church , as it is now of the romans against us , that we abandon these ceremonies , & relinquish them , to which my answer at this time shall be no other then what origin gave celsus ; celsus affirms
these devotions , when as it is a maine argument urged by bellarmine , that altars and sacrifices were used by the gentiles , therefore they must still be retained by christians : i know not what antiquity they pretend , nor
their altars to such as it is unknown , or at the least uncertain if ever any such were in the world , as to s. george , s. catharine , and s. christopher , doing no otherwise then did the romans
their altars , and what it is wherein we must leave and forsake them . altars , as they are properly so taken for those on which the typicall or supposed real sacrifices were offred , are now ceased and taken away
gospel , and consider what it is , wherein we are to imitate these gentiles ; concerning their altars , and what it is wherein we must leave and forsake them . altars , as they are properly so taken for those
in magna in _____ . it is a true saying of pope gregory the first , ( see maral . @ 13 . ) and we have found it experimentally true in these @ here debated . qui modica spernit paulatim @
, form & continuance , it was the same with this , only differing in the day of the month and _pparition of two suns then , whereas now there were three . which mr. fox thus relates ( see acts &
16 . ) and becanse it was a token only of love , grace and peace , he placed it with the horns downward , and the back towards heaven , to testify and proclaim peace and mercy to the world ;
him towards his enemy , it is a sign of peace and safety , that he hath no intent at all to shoot , hurt , or slay him ; but when once the archer tur_es his bow the contrary way with
that but one way vvhethervvards it is reflicted ; this seemed above 30 . miles distance every way . 5 . fiftly , other rain - bows continue but a short space , and then vanish : this a full hour from
the church . thirdly , it is not terminated objectively in god or christ , because done to them , only to @ the communion of all the faithful communicants at the table or altar to which we bow , as the
hath : first , because it is a new upstart innovation , prescribed by by no law of god or man . secondly , because it tends to erect , countenance and usher in a relative worship of god , in ,
it as necessary ; therefore it is no divine worship . sxitly , no relative worship of god , in , through , or by reason of any other creature is of divine institution , there being no pa_t en of any
have not done . therefore it is not of divine institution . fi_tly , no divine worship due to god or required by him , is arbitrary to be done or not done at mans election ; neither can it be omitted
to god himself , unless it were in prayer only , mat . 26 . 39 . acts 20 . 36 . c. 21 . 5 . ephes . 3 . 14 . rom. 4 . 10 . 11 . a thing
? a divine adoration certainly it is ; being not done to the table of the lord but to the lord of the table , paralleled with worshipping towards gods temple , worshipping at his foot - stool , daniels prayer ,
, ) the other as it is derived from the word presbyter , in the new testrment , which is senior , and hath no relation to a sacrificing function . it must follow , that your disputers seeking to urge the
the hath this reference : it was so anciently placed as to stand round about it . and here by the way . i cannot but observe the desperate impudency and sottish_es of the times wherein we live . bishop jewel and
evidenceth . thirdly , because it is a contradiction to what himself professedly maintains in other places against the papists , and in the words immediately foregoing , as appears by these two particulars : first , the bishop in the words
our saviours _ames , because it is and ought to be most cringed , capped and bowed to of all others ? till all these quest_ons are resolved , j shall desire them to suspend this their capital reason . the 2
? if so , then it is almost execrable and ab_minable ; if not , then let them inform me ; how that which is least bowed to , worshipped or adored , is most reverenced and respected , then that which
12 . 2 . and it is point - blancke against the homilies , articles , writers and established doctrine of the church of england , to which these rebellious sons of belial have subscribed . if they mean only christs spiritual
lords - table , because it is the place of christs special presence upon earth , and his chair of estate wherein he @ . see giles widows his lawless kneelesse schismatic puri _____ , p. _9 . shelfords sermon of gods
bowing to altars , yet it is to be given only to sacred consecrated alta_s , not to others ; but few or none of our altars , not one of our lords @ ables have yet been so solemnly consecrated ,
, in such manner as it is given to churches , fonts , pulpits , bibles , and the like , not by bowing to or towards them , but by a reverend use and estimation of them free from superstition on
in former times as now it is of late : the fore - cited authorities ( two only excepted , and those late popish writers ) making nothing at all either for the lawfulness of this ceremony , though many ignorant superstitious
before the gosple , when it was carried to the altar or readers seat . and then relating divers ceremonies about the mass , he saith : sacerdos autem humiliationem christi usque ad mortem ctucis nobis indicat , quando se usque ad
to these hours . therefore it is no proof for ministers or laymens practise of it then , or now . the eleaventh antiquity . the eleaventh , is that of rudolphus tungrensis , flourishing about the year of our lord 1380.
with the faithful , because it is the principal part of the church ; and if all these fail , because it is used in cathedral churches ; which reason they never dreamed on then . thirdly , that as they then
bow to it , because it is gods mercy seat , the place of christs special presence on earth , his chair of state , to testify ove communion with the faithful , because it is the principal part of the church
it , him whose cross it is , yet wee are not said to coadore the cross w__h christ , neither by this is there one nature of the cross and of christ . similiter adorare altar , _oadorare altari trinitat_ non
text doth manifest . besides it is aris dei adgeniculari , in the passive , not adgeniculare in the active verb ; therefore no voluntary genuflexion to the altar , but an enjoined and enforced prostration of a pae_itent by the altar
altars . thirdly , admit it were aris dei , yet it makes nothing to the purpose : for this was not any precise bowing to or towards the altar such as is now used , but only a kneeling or prostration
est , &c. now , it were absurd for them thus to bow and kneel down to the altar of god , for either of these two causes ; therefore it was questionless to the saints of god , and must so
of late times , as it is not easy to judge what part it had s. james for the au_hour . but if he were author of any part , yet doubtless not of this , as mr. cooke proves sufficiently ;
, adminis_red thereon , as it is in sundry such passages in the fathers , nicephorus greg . f. 10 . cent . magd . 8 . col. 677 . cent . 9 . col. 243 . and others . for bowing
psal. 95 . 6 . it is as extravaga_t to this purpose as the rest ; the table being not our lord and maker , before noted , towards whom this text enjoins us to kneel and fall down prostrate : which
testify : or else , it was only a standing upright , and praying to god before it , o near it , without any incuruation of the body to or towards ie : 2 kin: 8 . 21 . 22 .
, the first part of it is a direct untruth , why not the latter too , there being no such command of hezechiahs in scripture , for the isralites to worship before one altar ? but admit there were : 3
. 3 . thirdly , it was only a turning with the face towards the temple ; not any genuflection or chringing to the temple : but this bowing of our novellers , is not simply towards , but likewise to the
. 2 . secondly , it was a worship towards the temple only , not towards the altar in the temple ; and so makes nothing for bowing towards the altar or table ; for the church or chapple it self is
praecepto nobis volita fuerunt ; it is not of the number of those traditions , which have been left unto us under any precept ; which he proves out of the forecited words of walafridus , strab_ , adding out of nicephorus
but then only , when it is removed and brought down into the body and middle of the church or chancel to celebrate the communion at , as the rubricke , injunction & canon resolve : but the table is not thus
the more prolix , because it is a poiet of law , not hitherto discussed fully , by any that i have met with . qvestion iiii . the 4 . question i shall propound , is this : what law or
makes a mortmani_ ; therefore it is against the law , and must have a special license and warrant from the king , under his great seal , as this patent prescribes . fourthly , this patent allows neither the bishops ,
he would consecrate it as it was , but gave sr . john a special charge to see these holy relics of rome repaired with all speed , which thereupon being done , hath driven many from the chapel . by which
hearing of it , alleged it was within his @ , and tee of reit belonged not to them , but to him to consecrate ; and because he would be sure to prevayle , he proffered to hallow it gratis ,
: ) all this time it was thought holy enough without any such consecration , by d. mountain then bishop of london : but his successor , after a years space ( i know not upon what grounds , or humour ,
to the dead , so it is now , and one place is as holy as another to be buried in , saving that comely order requires the bodies not to be castaway , because they are the temples of the holy
be called , when it it is no better then other earth , but rather worse , for the conjuring that bishops use about it . ) it appears in the gospel by the legion living in graves , the widows son
resort together in , though it were never hallowed by bishop at all . it is written that god dwells not in temples made with hands , nor is worshipped with any work of mans hands , but he is a _spirit
upon the altar ; as it is clear they do , both by their writings ; their prayers before their sermont , ( where they pray for the preist__ ) @ serve & way a_ the altar their erecting and pleading for
then take heed ( as it is now __gh time so to do it ) lest of the memory is be @ a @ ; lect of a communion it be made a private ea _____ ( therefore of having our tables
that otherwise doth presume then it was given by the author , but when the author gave it , he gave it not a sacrificing shave_ mass - priest , he gave it not at an altar , but at a table
celebrate the mystery , then it was delivered by him : neither can he be devout that otherwise doth presume then it was given by the author , but when the author gave it , he gave it not a sacrificing shave_
cathedral & collegiate churches ; it is high time for us to propound this first question to these domestic ___ialists what their intentions are , to stop their further progress , both by a linely discovery and strenuous opposition of these their
it doth not , yet it is such a sacrifice as needs neither priest , altar , or tables situated altar - wise , even by the homily and book of common - prayers resolution ; therefore no such romish massing sacrifice
sacrificing or massing priest . it is a rule both in philosophy & divinity , omnia agunt propter finem ; all things ( especially all rational agent ) aim at some ultimate , uttermost , or final end in all their actions
priests , ( not as it is used for a contract of the word presbyter , which signifies properly an elder or minister of the gosple , but of the word sacerdos , denoting a sacrificing or massing priest . it is
divers gave money , & it was thought it had been given to the poor ; but the man that held the basin gave it to the surragate , ( the sum gathered being reputed about 40 . s , ) he
of the dedication , & it was winter , & iesus walked in the temple in salomons porch . all his whole sermon was to prove the truth of the altar . he had not one place of canonical scripture as we
22 . 23 . and it was at hierusalem the feast of the dedication , & it was winter , & iesus walked in the temple in salomons porch . all his whole sermon was to prove the truth of the altar
of peter and paul & it is under the jurisdiction of sant georges chapel at windsor . the next day being the lords day , as soon as the priests ( for so they would be called , to suite the better with
the history whereof , as it was acted , i have under the hands of an eyewitnes or two , who with - hundreds more can make it good , if need be upon their oaths . the manner of altering the
in that book . therefore it is in the bishops power to cause the table to beplaced and railed in altar - wise against the east end of the church , and there it ought to stand . i answer first ,
written on it , as it is in many churches . thus ioseph was said , to be set over all the land of egipt : gen . 41 . 33 , 43 . not in situation , for so he could
in case the end of it were so situated , yet here signifies only , the north-side , not end of the table , the north-side being the norh - part of the table , as well as the end the original
the self same manner as it was situated ; for the table being but a long square , not a perfect quadratum , hath but two sides , & two ends ; the narrowest square of it , being ever in our
) contrary to law ; it is but an innovation , introduced by some violēt innouators , without any lawful authority , for what end all england sees , and knows to well . so as i may truly thus retort the
the wall , but as it were in midst . thus was the altar of s. mary placed in rome , so that in the great inundation of tiber in the days of pope nicholas the 3 . the water rotunde quatuor
the contrary . since therefore it is evident by all these authorities and reasons , notwithstanding these objections , that the communion table is no altar , and that the church , state and writers of england have abandoned all altars ,
in it , but as it was purged from these terms , and testified in 5 . & 6 . ed. 6 . with such alterations and additions as were annexed to it by this act . so as it neither revives
; for the tittle of it is this : an act against such persons as shall unreverently speak against the sacrament of the body and blood of christ , commonly called the sacrament of the altar , &c. and the body of
of christ's death ( as it is manifest in the two verses next following , ) which is by a christian faith , and not in the sacrament only , whereof none can be partakers that remain in the ceremonial observations of
the lords table , because it is ordained for the lords supper , 1 . cor . 11 . 20 . in the administration of the blessed sacrament of the body & blood : the fathers also call it a table in
with your rhemists , as it is wont with false prophets , ezek . 13 . 10 . one builds up a muddy vval , and others daube it over with a rotten plaster , and when a storm comes the wall
spiritual altar . and if it were as much for the advantage of their cause to prove , that mass is said in heaven , as that in earth : and that christ is properly bread without a figure , as that
is called a table , it is in respect of the heavenly food of christs body & blood received . rainolds . the note of your rhemists , about the greek & hebrew word is true , ( i grant ) yet
and theophylact . and when it is called a table , it is in respect of the heavenly food of christs body & blood received . rainolds . the note of your rhemists , about the greek & hebrew word is true
the said body sacrificed , it is also called an altar of the fathers , even of gregorie nazianzene , chrysostome , socrates , augustine , and theophylact . and when it is called a table , it is in respect of
by the law , as it is written , gal. 5 . 2 . if ye be circumcised , christ shall profit you nothing . the apostle therefore exhorting the hebrewes , to stablish their hearts with grace , that teaches them
but as for your shift it is not so honest : for presupposing ( as you do ) that it is very blood and raw flesh , which is there received , the word of table fitteth it not so well ,
was upon it , and it is christ , not sacrificed upon an altar of stone , by a priest , but which offered himself upon mount calvary , without the gates of jerusalem , as is expressly mentioned here in this
, are even yet as it were in the tabernacle , cannot be partaker of our saviour christ , who suffered out of the gates of jerusalem , and is the truth of the shadows & figures , which were burnt without
indifferently a table , as it is indeed , and an altar , as it is unproperly . but that it is called of them a table , and was indeed a table made of boardes , & removable , set in
body of christ . for it is not lawful for the jewes to eat of it . this altar of necessity is in the entrance of the tabernacle of witness ; that is in the entrance of the heavens , because we
of christ's death , as it is manifest in the two verses next following , which is by christian faith , and not in the sacrament only , whereof none can be partakers that remain in the ceremonial observation of the leviticall
to you . wood . it is strange to me indeed , if you mean the altar of stone . chich . it is that altar that i mean . wood . i understand not the altar so . chich . no
me to , me think it is too much . chich . i dare say , you know what it means well enough . the most fool in my house will understand my meaning better then you do . wood . there
foolish to eat stones ? it is a plain _ocke . wood . why my lord , you said i had no learning , nor knowledge . wherefore it becomes you to make things more plain to me , and not to
of the cross , whereof it is not lawful for as many of you as be yet duskened with the shadow of the law to eat , nor to be partakers of it at all . now therefore must the papists be
on the altars , whereof it was not lawful even for the very offerers to eat : so likewise have we a sacrifice once offred upon the altar of the cross , whereof it is not lawful for as many of you
juggle unto the unlearned , it is all their tabernacle , & only refuge against all tempests , and this is as well their shot anchor , as their halow at their hosing up of their anchor . but to hale in
is called a table , it is in respect of the heavenly food of christs body & blood received . and other papists generally infer from hence ( as harding against jewell , & hare in his conference with d. rainolds ,
23 . math. and when it is called a table , it is in respect of the heavenly food of christs body & blood received . and other papists generally infer from hence ( as harding against jewell , & hare in
erected of stone : whereupon it is also by another called a novelty to have altars builded . d. willet , in his synopsis papismi , the 9 . general controversy quaest . 6 . part . 2 . error 54 .
things are set ( as it is ) a table , as also the holy things themselves , they call by their proper names , of signs & sacraments , and not by the improper and borrowed speech of sacrifice or host
a sacrifice unproperly ( because it is a sign of the true sacrifice ) when in truth they will only recommend unto us a sacrament . other sometimes , even the naked and bare name of altar they take away from you
quality in the altar . it is like you are sick of the disease of the pharisees , which was covetousness , ( as chrysostome and theophylact note ) by magnifying the gifts of the altar . m. james calfhill , in
optatus l. 6 . therefore it is nothing like popish altars . so on matthew 23 . fol. 46 . sect . 7 . he determines thus : popish altars that are set up to overthrow the altar of the cross ,
. sermon . 46 . it was removable & carried by the clerks august . quaest . vet . & nov. test . q. 101 . or otherwise as appears by optatus l. 6 . therefore it is nothing like popish altars
commonly were called , as it is manifest by s. augustine ep . 50. bonifacio . and optatus l. 6 . both speaking of the rage of the donatists , which brake , or shaved , or scraped the boardes of the
holy use of ministration , it is not the matter we stand upon , but whither they were consecrated for this end . they were called altars unproperly , as the sacrament was called a sacrifice , the ministers sacrificing priests &
he calls an altar , it is not lacking in our churches at the lords table : that is to say , true repentance of heart , which is as the prophet calls it , psal. 51 . v. 19 . a
if you will ( seeing it is also mentioned in s. basil ) due to be done at the lords table , which , as a fore is noted , he calls an altar , it is not lacking in our churches
the lords table , at it were an altar . but such kind of figurative speech , can be no just cause , to set up altars , rather then tables , unless they think that their crosses also should be turned
taken away , forasmuch as it is but the vain invention of man , & hath been greatly abused of the massing papists ? for what hath the temple of god to do with idolls ? what concord is there between christ
matter of conscience , yea it was become deadly sin to minister the holy communion without these scenical , histrionicall , & hickescorner like garments ; so that now to sing mass or to consecrate , as they use to say ,
obscured & defaced , when it is daubed over with the vile & vain colours of mans wisdom , although outwardly never so gorgeous and glorious . afterward as superstition grew and increased , so likewise the people began more and more
his apostles . and contrariwise it is then most obscured & defaced , when it is daubed over with the vile & vain colours of mans wisdom , although outwardly never so gorgeous and glorious . afterward as superstition grew and increased
none otherwise setforth , then it was used and left unto us of christ , & of his apostles . and contrariwise it is then most obscured & defaced , when it is daubed over with the vile & vain colours of
and most beautiful ; when it is most simple , & none otherwise setforth , then it was used and left unto us of christ , & of his apostles . and contrariwise it is then most obscured & defaced , when
certain reformed churches , if it were received by public authority and common consent , and might conveniently be used in our churches ; i could allow that gesture best . for as it is be doubted , but that christ and
him : he answered , it is written ; thou shalt worship the lord , math. 4 . standing , which is used in the most part of the reformed churches in these our days , i can right well allow it
of their hands . if it were to be elevated & served to the standers by , as it hath been used , christ would have elevated it above his head . he delivered it into the hands of his disciples ;
none can exceed , when it is plain & evident by the ancient writers , that the geastes of the lords supper long and many years after christ's resurrection sat at the table . so far is it of , that they
have an altar , whereof it is not lawful for them to eat , which serve in the tabernacle . our altar is not of stone , but of god . not worldly , but heavenly , not visible , but invisible
of the new testament . it is nobly said of s. ambrose , the sacraments require no gold , neither do they delight in gold , which are not bought for gold . the garnishing of the sacramentes is the redemption or
resort together in , though it were never hallowed by bishops at all , but have only a pulpit , a preacher to the people , a deacon for the poor , a table for the communion , with bare walls ,
, and the gospel as it were a new law , surrogated , confirmed and established in steed of the old . therefore christians thus freed from the law ought to have no altars , but tables ; for what husbandman (
and people of furnis . it was long ago ordained in a council of bishops , that no clergy man or minister of god should be appointed an executor or overseer , of any mans will , since all who are honoured
of assuras . as if it were lawful after the altars of the devil , to approach to the altar of god &c. whence we behold and believe this censure to have come from the disquisition of god ; no apud altar
benefits him another however , it is but a single testimony , & therefore ought not to ever - balance those many pregnant , weighty , punctual authorities to the contrary . the last authority , to prove the name & use
if allegorically and spiritually , it is meant only of christ , our spiritual altar , heb. 13 . 10 . rev. 65 . 9 . on whom all the faithful , who are spiritual priests , 1 . pet . 2
of consecration ? ) therefore it is no altar . 8 . every altar was , and ought to be dedicated & solemnly consecrated unto god , with special ointments , sprinkling of blood and solemnities ; ( specially the altar of
shall swear by the altar it is nothing , but whosoever swears by the gift that is upon it , he is guilty . ye fools and blind , for whether is greather , the gift , or the altar that sanctifieth
from the scriptutes silence . it is not warranted from scripture therefore i am not bound to believe it ? since the apostle here reasons thus ; that none of the tribe of judah attended the altar , because moses speak nothing
of the church , though it were an altar , as these 3 , termed altars , are in the midst of the body ; then that the table is properly an altar , and therefore ought to stand in the east
quite expunged , so as it is not to be found in our book of common prayer , articles , injunctions , homilies , canons , which never term the lords table an altar , either properly or improperly . 3 .
what is done , as it was used in the primative church , when as the abomination done upon altars was not known , nor the sacrifice of christs precious blood so conculcated and trodden under feet . hereupon , as also
the same , and sorry it is no more frequented & haunted , but this i would wish , that the magistrates would put both the priest , minister and the people into one place , and shut up the partition called
ionah . a great shame it is for a noble king , emperor , or magistrate contrary to gods word , to deteyne or keep from the devil or his ministers any of their goods o treasure , as the candles ,
no altars , and therefore it was not without the great wisdom and knowledge of god , that christ , his apostles , and the primitive church lacked altars , for they knew that the use of them was taken away ,
of the church ; yet it is only such , and thus to be situated when the sacrament is administered : for howe is it his chair of state , his mercy seat , and chiefest place of residence , when there
7 . 49 . and it is the express resolution of the scripture , and the article of our creed , that christ in his humane nature hath his throne , and mercy seat only at his fathers own right hand in
the mercy seat , and it was put above upon the arc . exod . 25 . 17 . 18 . 19 . 20 . 21 . 22 . c. 26 . 34 . c. 30 . 6 . c. 31 .
and hid the law , it was made of pure gold , two cubits , and an half broad with two cherubims of gold of beaten work in the two ends of the mercy seat , and it was put above upon
of the chancell , because it is christs mercy seat , his claire of estate , and the special place of his presence here on earth , on which he sitts , and resides , and the east end of the chancel
, and convenient , therefore it is to be observed , and retained of us . the second reason alleged by our novellers for their new dislocation of communion tables , is this : the communion tables ought to be placed at
now plead for : so it is built upon a false foundation . for first no scripture saith , that christ shall come to judgment from the east : but that he shall come in the clouds , rev. 1 . 7
this allusion therefore , as it is impertinent , ( there being no similitude between the lords table , & a branch , ) so e proves , that the communion table should be placed in the midst of the church ,
of the church . as it is a ridiculous inconsequent ( fit for a cambridge ignoramus , ( where this good logical argument , with many such like , was printed ) so there is little analoges between branches & lords tables
of the church , since it is warranted by the practice of the primitive church whose communion tables and altars were made only of wood , not stone , ( as bishop jewell , and bishop babington prove at large out of
enioy_ed . 4 . becanse it is less troublesome to the minister to distribute , and to the people to receive the sacrament at his hands the nearer both of them are to the communion table . 5 . when the table
abolished , this situation of it was again revived as a sovereign antidote against these popish innovations , and so hath continued eversince . the altering therefore of it must needs tend to the introduction of those things again , & so
writers . 4 . because it is the most usual and proper situation of tables among all nations in all ages both a broad & at home , who place their tables at which they eat , and drink , in the
seas , 3 . because it is most consonant to the book of common prayer , queen elizabeths injunctions , the bishops own canons , and the judgement of our best writers . 4 . because it is the most usual and
, therefore this situation of it is rather to be used then the other . 2 . because this is most agreeable to the practice of the apostles , fathers , and primitive church in the purest times , as i have
ab alexandro thus seconds . it was ( saith he ) a usual custom , ut sacrificantes aras circumcurrerent , that those who sacrificed should run round about the altars , beginning their course from the left hand to the right ,
indifferently a table , as it is indeed ; and an altar , as it is unproperly ; but that it is called of them a table , and was indeed a table made of boards , and removable set in the
- translated . 3 . it is not well known neither by experience ( for no man is so ancient , ) nor by any authentic writer extant , that many 100. years before durand was borne the altars generally , stood
of the greek church as it is used at this day , saith thus ; in the greek church there is but one altar , and the same standing in the midst of the qvire , and the quire alsoe was in
from the rest , whereof it was called cancel , or chancell , &c. and whereas m. hardinge imagines , that the people for distance of place could not hear what the priest said . a man that hath considered the old
. council of constantinople , it is written thus . when the lessen or chapter was reading , the people with silence dr_ve together round about the altar , and gave care ; ( yet d. pocklington writes , that they are
it stood before . therefore it is not to be moveable , not fixed , or railed in at the east end of the chancell . the canons anno 1603 . can . 82 . thus second the injunction . whereas wee
it be jewish , as it is not , ) because they write so @ lie for altars , more jewish far then the names , or strict sanctification of the lords - day sabbath . to draw to a conclusion ;
reader . christian reader , it is storied of croesus his dumb - borne son , that when he saw a persian captain going to stay his father , his filial affection was so stirred in him at the sight , that
there proves at large . it is also evident by numb. 3 . 26 . c. 4 . 26 . ( and the hanging for the door of the gate of the court which is by the tabernacle rovnd abovt , &c.
also ( writes he ) it is to be considered unto the honouring of gods holy name ( of his table rather ) in what place of the chancel gods board or seat should stand . doth not nature itself teach us
. ( i think when it is in the ward - robe , cart , imbroy derers or upholsters shop , &c. should have been excepted , ) he must show us some law or statute for it , ere we can
justice or government , for it is thy chief office . unless your most sacred majesty follow this his royal advice , things are likelier to grow worse then better , if you remit all to your prelates , and expect a
intelligence thence ; and therefore it was high time for your majesty , your prelates and the state to look more strictly to our religion , and to take away all occasions of such rumours ; since which there have been more
house the last parliament , it is a thousand to one , but you will soon , discover the very parties , not only by guess but by name . besides , if your majesty will once more cast your prying eye
white hall gate , ( it were a goodly sign , the sign of such a bishops skin and rochet thus exalted ) and that they wondered how the arch - bishops could sit by and hear such a sermon , and
it is false ; yet it were their duty to forbear such speeches , or cast _uch scruples into your subjects minds : but since they are most n_torious falsehoods and disloyal jesuitical practises in the highest degree , making your highness
were it as true as it is false ; yet it were their duty to forbear such speeches , or cast _uch scruples into your subjects minds : but since they are most n_torious falsehoods and disloyal jesuitical practises in the highest
where , or year when it was printed , or any intimation at all that it was ever licensed ; all which were plain evidences , that it was printed in a corner , without any license at all . and whereas
bishops forgery and addition ) it is not lawful for the church to ordain any thing that is contrary to gods word written , &c. which whole first clause to yet : is no part of the article , but a mere
; ) runs thus : it is not lawful for the church to ordain any thing that is contrary to gods words , &c. but the bishops to advance their own usurped authority & gain some colour to arregate to themselves a
name of iesus , when it is pronounced , brought in by popes with indulgences , for idolatrous ends , and not known , not used in the primitive church for above 1200 years after christ ; what ever some have written
of joy and comfort : it is such an estate as you can never lose or fall from : he that hath the life of grace but once began within him , can die no more , the second death shall have
your state of grace . it is a state of joy and comfort : it is such an estate as you can never lose or fall from : he that hath the life of grace but once began within him , can
, never so small , it is a sure pledge and earnest of heaven , it gives you actual possession , and seison of eternal life , it keeps you so that you can never perish . if once you have the
and delighted with it . it is the only and chiefest treasure of your souls , it is the only thing that makes you truly blessed , and that for ever : let god then , and all men see how much
in truth enjoy it . it is such a divine and heavenly treasure , that no moth or canker can corrupt it , nor no thief purloin it : he who doth but once enjoy it , is made an happy man
slighted of the world ? it is the part of wise and understanding men , to prise and purchase such estates , as they are always sure to enjoy : now there is no estate , no purchase in the world so
is in natural , so it is likewise in spiritual things , they both desire accomplishment and perfection . and therefore a good christian , doth always go from grace to grace , from faith to faith , and from strength to
height of grace . as it is in natural , so it is likewise in spiritual things , they both desire accomplishment and perfection . and therefore a good christian , doth always go from grace to grace , from faith to
in gods service , because it is the very joy , the very comfort and rejoicing of their hearts and souls , their very heaven upon earth , and the very essence and substance of their happiness , to obey and serve
all the saints ; and it is of such an operatiue working and stirring nature , that it always stirs them up to action , they cannot be idle though they would ; this very love of god constrains men for to
the holy ghost , and it is much in larged and increased in them by this assurance of their total and final perseverance in the state of grace . now this love of god doth so warm and heate , and so
proportion and degree , as it is to god himself : they hate and detest , yea they do utterly defy and abhor from their very hearts and souls , all kind of sin ; they hate it with an implacable and
you who urge and press it were never yet acquainted , either with the nature or the power of true and saving grace , nor yet with the mysteries and secrets of the word of god . for if ever you had
them had any faith , it was an historical , not a justifying and saving faith , and the faith from which they departed was nothing else but the doctrine of faith , and not the grace of justifying and living faith
scriptures had the spirit , it was but only the ordinary and common gifts , but not the justifying , sanctifying , and saving graces of the spirit . if any of them had any faith , it was an historical ,
you speak of ? true it is , the diuills themselves believe and tremble . jam 2 19 . it may be iudas did so to : but yet that iudas who was a devil , or that the devils have any
ancient and modern . so it is resolved by tertullian : de fuga in persecutione . lib. cap. 3 . by origin . hom . 4 . in psal. 36 . et hom . 3 . in math. by hilarie in psal.
grace in denying christ , it is the express determination and resolution of most divines both ancient and modern . so it is resolved by tertullian : de fuga in persecutione . lib. cap. 3 . by origin . hom . 4
if you do it , it is a sign you want the grace of charity , who judge so harshly of other men's sins , and yet think so lightly of your own : fourthly , it is evident that peter fell
sin of his , though it were great and grievous , yet it could not wholly deprive him of the state of grace . thirdly , it is evident , that peter fell not totally from the state of grace , because
fail finally to ( because it was not in abeiance , nor yet transmitted into any other subject for the time , but utterly lost and annihilated by this his sin as you affirm ) and therefore if this prayer of christ
used it . you know it is the usual custom of the saints of god to humble and debase themselves in the sense and feeling of their own corruptions . iacob he confesses , ( ) that the days of his pilgrimage
after his repentance . if it were restored unto him in the very beginning , and act of his repentance , from whence doth that appear ? sure i am , there is no ground in scripture for to warrant it ,
not before , but because it was now restored unto him again . i answer , that this is but a mere cavil and an idle conceit , not grounded on the scripture . for if dauid had lost the spirit by
these sins . thirdly , it is evident and plain by psal. 51 . 11 . for there he prays to god in his penitential psalme ( which was penned when as the prophet nathan came unto him and informed him of
recorded this his fall , it is a point of arrogance and strange presumption for our antagonists , so confidently to determine , that dauid fell away from the state of grace , when as the scriptures do not warrant it .
our antagonists , and therefore it is not to be believed . doubtless if dauid had fallen totally or finally from the state of grace in committing these his sins , the holy ghost who hath recorded his sin and life ,
hath not recorded it , it is but a bare collection of our antagonists , and therefore it is not to be believed . doubtless if dauid had fallen totally or finally from the state of grace in committing these his sins
: true it is , it is recorded how he fell into these sins , and i believe it to be true , because the scripture tells me so : but that dauid fell totally from grace in committing of these sins
state of grace : true it is , it is recorded how he fell into these sins , and i believe it to be true , because the scripture tells me so : but that dauid fell totally from grace in committing
reasons . first , because it is not recorded in the whole book of god , that dauid fell from the state of grace : true it is , it is recorded how he fell into these sins , and i believe
from grace or faith ; it is your own imagination and surmise : wherefore let these be true believers , or no true believers , this their example proves nothing against me . the third example is that of john 6 .
and in this very sense it is taken . math 7 . 21 . 22 . john . 6 . 2 . 14 . cap. 11 . 40 , 41 , 48 . cap. 12 . 42 , 43 . cap. 5
15 , 27 . whence it is stiled , the word of faith . gal. 3 . 2 . and 1 tim. 4 . 6 . therefore this belief which was wrought merely by miracles without the word and spirit of god
5 . 22 . so it is always wrought by the word of god . rom. 10 . 14 , 15 , 27 . whence it is stiled , the word of faith . gal. 3 . 2 . and 1 tim.
and saving faith , as it is always a fruit of the spirit of god . gal. 5 . 22 . so it is always wrought by the word of god . rom. 10 . 14 , 15 , 27 . whence
not be true , because it is distinguished and put in opposition to the faith of the fourth ground . but if all this will not give you satisfaction . i answer , that the difference in this parable is only intended
heart and spirit ; therefore it was no true , lively , justifying and saving faith . fifthly , because the faith of these two grounds is put by way of @ and opposition to that of the @ and good gro_nd
. 18 . 13 . it was such a faith , or credulity rather , which was settled in the understanding , but was not rooted and grounded in the heart and spirit ; therefore it was no true , lively ,
before . thirdly , because it is said of one of the grounds , that afflictions and temptations made the seeds that was sown in it to wither away : and of the other ground , that the thorns and weeds sprung
zealous and so ardent as it was before : but yet the habit of her love was still remaining in her : she had love in her still though not in that degree as she had it before : yet she had
by saint john . for it is there said of the church of ephesus : verse , 2 , 3 . that she had works , and labour , and patience : that she could not bear them which were evil ;
justification , ( and if it were so , it would make quite against you not for you , for if they were in this estate when as p_l wrote unto them , then they were not fallen from grace as you
the church : other times it is taken for the major and the greater part only , and not for every indiuiduall and particular member . if you take now the whole church , in the largest sense , for every visible
whole church : for sometimes it is taken universally for all and every one that is included and comprised within the church : other times it is taken for the major and the greater part only , and not for every indiuiduall
or bad ; secondly , it is taken properly and strictly , for the whole company of the elect and chosen saints of god , and for them only ; in which sense it is used in our creed . secondly ,
word church : first , it is taken in a large and general sense , for all such as make an outward profession of christ , whether they are good or bad ; secondly , it is taken properly and strictly ,
and the angels had , it was no grace but nature , it had its rise and being from themselves , and was incident unto their natures : therefore they might lose it , and fall from it as they did .
of mere free gift , it was not merited and purchased for them by christ , and therefore they might lose it . but the graces of the saints they are a purchased possession , they are purchased by christ himself at
to it , and therefore it is no great wonder though they fell from grace : but the graces which the saints of god have now , they have the promises of perseverance and perpetuity annexed to them ; ( as you
and kingdom over them . it is now far otherwise in the graces of the saints : for their graces , they are not their own , nor yet their persons , but their graces and their persons they are christs :
and the angels had , it was their own : they had free will and liberty to dispose of it at their pleasure : they were lords over that grace the which they had , their grace had no lordship and kingdom
god do now enjoy , it is not in their own keeping , they themselves are not the guardians and preservers of it : but it is god himself who keeps it and preserves it in them by his power . this
and the angels had , it was in their own possession and custody , they themselves were the guardians and keepers of it . but that grace which the regenerate saints of god do now enjoy , it is not in their
to be true , yet it is nothing to the purpose . and so much in answer to this twenty sixth argument , in which i have been over tedious , by reason that our antagonists rely so much upon it .
truly and spiritually regenerated : it is only mr. mountagues false and brainsick conceit who torments and rackes our common prayer book to defend his error . but admit , that this were the received opinion and doctrine of the church of
. valley regenerated , because it is not so revealed in the scriptures . this charitable opiniō then of the church of england being restrained to indiuiduall & particular infants , and not extended and enlarged to all such as are baptised
believe and repent , because it is contrary to the revealed will and word of god . so a man may and ought to say of every particular infant which is baptised that he is regenerated , because he knows not any
of our church , unless it were to correct it , and to cauell at it , for which he taxes and condemns others who are less guilty then himself : would have the word in the preterperfect tence , citing this
in the right sense , it is no more in effect then this . that it is christs will and pleasure that infants should be baptised , and that he hath'a favour and respect unto them : but that all infants that
to christ . lastly , it was instituted to knit men faster and to bring them @ unto @ , and to make them more @ and careful for @ and @ @ him , to abandon and avoid all kind of
from turks and infidels , it is the outward @ and seal whereby they are known to belong to christ . lastly , it was instituted to knit men faster and to bring them @ unto @ , and to make them
on mon : @ , it is the @ @ & @ christians , where by they are distinguished from turks and infidels , it is the outward @ and seal whereby they are known to belong to christ . lastly ,
. 19 . fourthly , it was instituted to distinguish christians , from @ @ and heat_ on mon : @ , it is the @ @ & @ christians , where by they are distinguished from turks and infidels , it
, 9 . thirdly , it was @ , to incorporate men into the visible church , and to interest them into the privileges and benefits which the church injoyes . mat . 28 . 19 . act . 2 . 37
. 11 . secondly , it was instituted as a type and sign , to @ unto vs , that as the water it self which wee use in baptism death wash away the filth of our bodies , so the blood
thees ends . first , it was instituted in the place of circumcision , to the intent that it might seal the covenant and promises of god unto the gentiles , as circumcision did unto the iewes : for which read acts
four respects , and so it is not to no purpose . secondly , i answer , that the end of baptism is not to regenerate men , neither was regeneration the end why baptism was instituted . for if baptism had
truly into christ , yet it is of much use and purpose to them . for first , it seals all the promises and covenants of god unto them , and gives them an interest and right unto them , if they
27 . article , and it is mr. rogers his observation in his second proposition raised from this article , and therefore we need not for to question it . but now you will object , that the holy ghost doth always
as are true believers , it is evident by the express words and testimony of the fathers : of tertullian lib. de baptismo , of hilarie : com : in math. canon . 10 . of august : cont . donat .
circumcision was , and so it is . for as there was an outward circumcision of the flesh which was common to all , and an inward circumcision of the heart , which was proper only to the elect of god :
. 2: 16 . so it is of all the other means of grace whatsoever , they are not effectual to work grace in all ; and therefore baptism cannot do it . there is the same reason of all gods ordinances
life to some , yet it is the savour of death unto death to others that do hear it , 2 cor . 2: 16 . so it is of all the other means of grace whatsoever , they are not effectual
the cause of damnation ; it is a cause of grace to none , but such as do receive in a worthy manner : so the word of god , though it be the savour of life unto life to some ,
to all unworthy communicants , it is the cause of damnation ; it is a cause of grace to none , but such as do receive in a worthy manner : so the word of god , though it be the savour
by their baptism : as it is said of the word of god , heb. 4 . 2 . that it profited them not , because it was not mixed with faith in them that heard it . so i may say
have put on christ . it was the galathians faith , and not their baptism , which made them the adopted sons of god : for in christ iesus neither circumcision avails any thing ( no nor yet baptism which succeeds it
shall be damned ; therefore it is not baptism of it self , but faith which doth regenerate and save men . so acts 8 . 36 . 37 . when the ethiopian eunuch demanded of philip : behold here is water
it , ( not as it is now commonly abused , and made a common process upon petty and trifling occasions ) it only suspends men from being partakers of the privileges of the church , it never cuts them off from
obtain it . wherefore as it is altogether impossible for to deprive them of the end , so likewise is it impossible to deprive them of the means which are annexed inseparably unto it : and therefore put the worst you can
in their sins , and it was impossible for them to repent at all of this their sin in respect of their sudden surprise : if they had had space & time to have repented , no doubt but that they would
any known sin , before it is possible for him to repent , i make no doubt or scruple of it , but that he shall as surely be saved as if he had lived to have repented of it : and
to this argument , as it is first propounded and objected . for the last clause of this objection : that a regenerate man may dye in the very act of sin , as he may murder himself , or god may
vel in charitate absconditur , it is either punished with condign repentance , or hid in mercy . i could add more reasons for to prove , that there is no absolute necessity of a particular repentance for every gross and known
to this argument , as it was , first propounded . fourthly , a particular , outward , and actual repentance for these sins of theirs is not absolutely required of them as necessary to salvation , because god in his mercy
the saints commit , yet it is not absolutely necessary to salvation for an inward disposition & purpose of the heart for to repent or a general repentance and humiliation without this particular will serve the turn . but of this see
perish for it : for it is the inward and habitual repentance , the inward frame , bent , and disposition of the soul that god respects more then the outward act , as wee may see by that of dauid .
in mercy , and because it is his covenant so to do . mich. 7 . 18 , 19 . and ier . 31 . 33 , 34 . if he doth take notice of those sins of theirs as to scourge
divorce against them : and it is such an offence as might move their gracious and loving father to disinherit and to cast them off . but yet they are not presently dead , neither are they in the state of death
bar of gods tribunal : it is such an adultery as might justly cause the lord their husband , to sue out a bill of divorce against them : and it is such an offence as might move their gracious and loving
sickness to the soul : it is such a felony as may justly draw their lives into question before the bar of gods tribunal : it is such an adultery as might justly cause the lord their husband , to sue out
regenerate saints of god , it is a deadly disease and sickness to the soul : it is such a felony as may justly draw their lives into question before the bar of gods tribunal : it is such an adultery as
unto god , ) but it is only required , as physic is in a sick man , to heal him and to cure him , and to preserve that life , that estate and seed of grace was in him before
into him ; ( as it was upon his first regeneration and conversion unto god , ) but it is only required , as physic is in a sick man , to heal him and to cure him , and to preserve
unto the deity ; because it is animated , quickened , and inliuened by the eternal spirit of god . now every true regenerate saint of god , is united and knit unto the deity it self , as well as christs
more , is , because it is united and knit unto the deity ; because it is animated , quickened , and inliuened by the eternal spirit of god . now every true regenerate saint of god , is united and knit
from him again , as it is for christ himself to die or perish , or to cease to be : for there is the same reason of the immortality and perpetuity of every faithful christian and member of iesus christ ,
and not to christ , it were vtt early impossible for them to expiate it , or to satisfy gods justice for it , by all the prayers and tears which they could make or shed , or by any other act
to them ( for if it were imputed to them and not to christ , it were vtt early impossible for them to expiate it , or to satisfy gods justice for it , by all the prayers and tears which they
the saints by christ , it is of mere grace and favour , through the righteousness of christ imputed to them , and not of any works , merit , or disert of theirs : christ therefore having fully satisfied for all
: this free gift , it is of many offences unto justification , rom. 5 . 18 . and the blood of christ , it cleanses them , not from some sorts of sin only , but from all sin , 1
deuteronomy. 27 . 26 . it is not so with evangelical justification , or justification only by faith in christ : for this justification where once it is in truth , is never abrogated , disanulled , or broken off by any
imputed to them , but it is always done away , and utterly abolished in iesus christ , who is their advocate , their mediator , their satisfaction and atonement . those to whom the eternal guilt of sin is not imputed
be in him , yet it is in him as a tyrant and a rebel , not a king or a friend , it rules and reigns not in him , he obeys it not in the lusts thereof , he never
then sin or satan , it is able to vanquish and subdue them , and to tread and bruise them under our feet , 2 cor . 10 . 4 . 5 . cap. 12 . 9 , 10 . rom. 16
is sufficient for vs , it is stronger then sin or satan , it is able to vanquish and subdue them , and to tread and bruise them under our feet , 2 cor . 10 . 4 . 5 . cap.
. 2 . 5 . it is wrought in vs by the selfsame almighty power of god , which raised up iesus christ from the dead , and set him at the right hand of god in heavenly places , ephes .
john 2 . 27 . it is such a seed , as can die no more , death hath no more dominion over it , john 11 . 25 , 26 . and rom. 6 . 9 . 10 . 11 .
. 2 . 23 . it is a divine nature , 2 pet . 1 . 4 . it will quench all the fiery darts of the wicked , ephes . 6 . 16 . and it cannot be quenched or drowned
the seed of grace , it is an immortal seed , 1 pet . 2 . 23 . it is a divine nature , 2 pet . 1 . 4 . it will quench all the fiery darts of the wicked ,
in the same manner as it was then urged , and so will answer it . a true regenerate man and a member of iesus christ may lie long in a gross and known finn without any actual repentance , as dauid
the sa_nts : when as it is only the inward and habitual disposition and inclination of the heart and soul that god requires and regards , as an acceptable and pleasing sacrifice unto him , never respecting the outward act of repentance
from christ : and if it were not so , in were impossible for any to be ingrafted into christ , or to be saved , for before he could repent him of one sin he would still commit another , which
quake and tremble , if it were admitted to be true , as they pretend it for to be . secondly , this argument follows not , because it would either bring in that popish distinction of venial and mortal sins ,
this argument follows not , it is evident by these ensuing reasons . first , because it requires a particular and actual repentance , after every known and gross sin that a true member of christ commits , as absolutely necessary to
of the saints : and it is only this . a true regenerate saint of god may commit a gross and unknown sin , and dye before he hath particularly repented of it . therefore he may fall away , both finally
fall from grace . for it is impossible for the elect of god to be seduced , math. 24 . 24 . mark 13 . 22 . reu . 9 . 4 . cap. 17 . 8 . it is impossible for
thing you pray for ? it is impossible for any man to pray in faith , if his prayer unto god , did imply an incertainty in gods persormance of the thing he prays for ; and so it should be impossible
of this nature , and it is but this in substance . the regenerate saints of god do always pray to god , not to hide his face from them , not to put them away in his anger , not to
have believed in vain : it is not meant of a true , living , saving , and justifying faith , but of an historicoll , fruitless , dead , and in - effectual faith or belief , which did never truly
argument follows not , for it is no more in sub_tance but this . the true regenerate saints of god may fall into afflictions and temptations , therefore they may fall from grace . so this text and argument doth not hurt
within them . secondly , it is evidently proved by the antithesis in the next ensuing verse . but wee ( that is wee who are true believers ) are not of them who draw back unto perdition : wee never fall
i deny it , because it is not warranted by the text . for those that thus draw back , they are not any such as are true believers , and truly ingra_ted into iesus christ , but only hypocrites and such
the only true consequent from it is this , therefore the true saints of god can never fall from grace . secondly , the greater number of these places are no more in sense , and substance but this . such as
words unto him . so it is here : the eternal life and welfare of the saints of god , depends upon their spiritual prowess , upon their holding fast of christ ; if they should turn their backs to satan and
not little flock , for it is your fathers will to give you a kingdom . christ hath assured them , that they @ never perish , and that none shall ever pluck them out of _is , or bis fathers hands
. 1 . 11 . it is no more in substance but this : brethren , you have a gracious and precious promise made unto you , of entering into the heavenly canaan , see therefore that you labour , and strive
saints of god ; and it is no more in effect but this : brethren , let every one of you search and try his own heart , for fear lèst he should have an vnbeleeuing heart , and so should depart
judgements . thirdly , because it is spoken only to preserve and keep men from falling , and not to prove that they may fall from grace . so that your argument from this place will be no more but this :
faith . secondly , because it is spoken only to awaken men out of their carnal security ; and to make them wary of committing sin for fear of gods temporal judgements . thirdly , because it is spoken only to preserve
me . first , because it is spoken only to hypocrites and presumptuous men ; and not to the saints of god : to such as think they stand , and not to such as do truly stand by faith . secondly
of seducers , when as it is impossible for them to be seduced ; therefore they may fall from grace . or , admonitions and cautions are the means to preserve the saints from falling from grace . therefore the saints to
being seduced , when as it is impossible for them to be seduced . christ tells vs expressly , that it is impossible for the elect to be seduced , math. 24 . 24 . mark 13 . 22 . and yet
thus reverence and fear ? it is only the glory , the majesty , and almighty power of god : they must serve god acceptablie , with reverence and godly fear , because that he is a consuming fire . so that
their souls . secondly , it is evident by paralelling this place , with some other scriptures that expound it . as psal. 2 . 10 . serve the lord with fear , and rejoice with trembling . joy and trembling can
fear which is here intended it is plain and evident . first , by the words themselves . work out your salvation with fear and trembling : what for fear of falling away from grace ? no such matter : for it
joy and perseverance , and it is the chiefest means ( a ) to keep men from falling from the state of grace . for first , this filial , reverent and godly fear , it keeps men from committing sin ,
meaning in this place , it is but your wrested , strained and forced collection . for the only end wherefore christ did speak those words , was only to encourage and stir up his disciples and his saints , to fruitfulness
and other places : as it is in other places compared to a net , which hath good and bad fish in it : to a field , which had tares as well as corn : to a floor , which hath
to the 11 . and it is this . if the regenerate saints of god who are once ingrafted into christ may not abide in christ , if they may bear no fruit , and so be cast out into the fire
pet . 2 . 21_ it is @ their beginning : therefore this scripture cannot be intended of godly and regenerate christians , but of hypocrites and wicked men , and so it makes not any thing for your purpose . if
meant only of hypocrites , it is evident by these reasons . first , because that this parable hath reference , to that miracle which christ did , in casting out of the devil out of the blind and dumme man ,
if they fall away : it is impossible for them to be renewed by repentance , or to be reconciled unto him again . so that all the argument which you can collect from them is this . if the true regenerate
. 2 . 22 . it is happened to them according to the true proverb : the dog is turned to his own vomit again , and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire : proves , that
to them , when as it is nothing so , wherefore , there being nothing in these places , but that which is common to hypocrites and carnal men , we ought with the most and best expositors upon these places ,
. 2: 21 . & it is no more but this in substance . those that have been once enlightened : those that have received the knowledge of the truth : those that have escaped the pollutions of the world through the
your selves : and so it is impertinent to your purpose . the third argument that may be objected , is collected from heb. 6 . 4 , 5 , 6 . c. 10 . 26 . to 30 . & 2
at the last ( as it is evident by this example of paul ) therefore they can never fall from grace . here you are put to this dilemma : either you must yield my argument to be sound and good ,
reprobate in this sense , it is evident by these ensuing reasons . first , because that paul was always sure and certain of his salvation . ( ) he was always fully persuaded , that neither tribulation , distress , persecution
this place of ezechiel , it is an impossible condition , and so gives not a being , nor a possibility to the thing supposed . for first : those that are regenerated , they are borne of god , & their
own collection , and so it is not to be regarded , though the place were meant of the righteousness of faith , and of true regenerate men . secondly , if i admit that this place is meant of the righteousness
warranted by the scripture : it is but your own collection , and so it is not to be regarded , though the place were meant of the righteousness of faith , and of true regenerate men . secondly , if i
to be regarded ; because it is not the scripture , but the racked construction and wresting of the scripture that is objected . your argument therefore from this scripture , being not within the proper scope , sense , and meaning
taken in this sense , it is but wrested : and the argument and sense so wrested from it , is not to be regarded ; because it is not the scripture , but the racked construction and wresting of the scripture
which they are collected : it is not to be valued or accounted of , but to be slighted and rejected as humane fancies and conceits , and as opposite and contrary to the express , plain , positive , and absolute
are of colours , because it is a sensible and experimental , a spiritual and heavenly truth , which is principally testified and revealed to the souls of men , by the inward operation of gods spirit , and is not subject
false ; but merely because it is the doctrine of the church . now for any man thus to tie and pin his faith upon the church , and upon that only , what is it but to be a professed roman
any difference between them , it is only a few dunces among vs , ( who are not to be reckoned of ) that make the difference ; but all the learnedest , ( which are in substance the whole church of
him for contradict himself . it is storied by diodorus siculus , of certain ilanders , who had such a double cloven and divided tongue ; partly from nature , partly from subtility and craft , that they could counterfeit and resemble
so much contradict himself ? it is a saying of e_ripedes in his hyppolitus coronatus , that all men have two tongues , the one true , the other what you will . mr. mountague hath the latter of these two tongues
decided by them before , it is not determined or resolved by them now , as mr. mountague records it . but how comes it to pass , that so great a scholar as master mountague should so much contradict himself ?
the world , as if it were your own : yet the truth is this , you had it from the rhemists , from mr. thompson , eckardus , bertius , aegidius hunnius , zacharias mathesius and other arminians or else from
and the whole sum of it is but this . brethren if you will not now obey the gospel which is preached unto you , and come into christ , and bring forth fruits worthy of it , you shall be depriued
) from god . therefore it is the received and established doctrine of the church of england , that true regenerate men , may both totally and finally fall from grace . was there ever such a ridiculous and simple argument propounded
church of england , as it is the church of england , to be but a wicked , haereticall , and atheistical church , in as much as there are many godly wholesome and necessary doctrines , which though they are in
received doctrine , when as it is nothing so . secondly , in these words mr. mountague affirms , that the homilies of the church of england established by authority , are not sound and orthodox , which is contrary to the
articles and homilies , so it is a great disparagement to our church , accusing her either of ignorance and dotage , in not knowing what her doctrine is ; or of inconstancy , in having no settled and positive doctrine ;
and fall into sin , it was not a fall from the state of grace , into the state of damnation , and therefore this is but a rising from some actual sin , to amendment of life . secondly , i
16 . article , therefore it is but your bare and wrested collection , and not the express doctrine of the article . secondly , the very words themselves will not bear that doctrine which you would thrust upon them in any
no sooner printed , but it was presently refelled by a learned bishop of our church as haereticall and quite opposite to the established and received doctrine of our church , it makes much for me , not against me : fo
allowance here : and seeing it was no sooner printed , but it was presently refelled by a learned bishop of our church as haereticall and quite opposite to the established and received doctrine of our church , it makes much for
no license here , ) it was transported unto lyons by some friends of his , & there was it printed . but no sooner was it come from the press , and scattred abroad in england , but as it found
license or approbation , because it was contrary to the doctrine of the church of england . after his death ( because it could find no license here , ) it was transported unto lyons by some friends of his , &
means to publish it , it was stopped at the press , and it sound no license or approbation , because it was contrary to the doctrine of the church of england . after his death ( because it could find no
beyond the seas , so it is the received , positive and resolved doctrine of the church of england , and of the learned & most judicious divines which the church of england ever bred . indeed mr. mountague , who contradicts
her confession , and as it is evident by those theses maintained and defended in her university , recorded in theses geneuenses , theses 27 . de fide . these . 6 . where our present assertion is publicly maintained and defended
assertion to the full , it is most evident and apparent to all the world , that this famous diot , ( and so all the protestants in germanie who assented to it , and were present at it ) have resolved
, our very assertion though it were not there particularly controverted , was yet de claro resolved for vs , in this famous diot in the name of all the protestants in germanie . for in the disputation of ratisbon , or
of the bohemian , as it is manifest by the 6 . article of their confession , which saith , that true faith doth always lift up him that hath it , and assures him , that in , and for christ
to measure , and therefore it is called the faith of gods elect . this faith doth pacify the conscience , and doth open unto vs a free access to god : it doth keep vs in our duty which wee owe
their articles and confessions , it is evident and plain . first by the latter confession of helvetia artic. 9 . because that the strength of the flesh and relics of the old man , are not of such great force in
protestant and reformed churches . it is evident then by this cloud of reueren , famousd , and renowned witnesses , that the most , the learnedest , and the soundest writers in all protestant and reformed churches in foreign parts ,
express for vs , for it is no more in brief then this : that hypocrites fall away from god , but such as are truly regenerated do still continue with him . that of cyprian is no more then this ,
for that of clement , it is nothing to the purpose : for he saith not that the holy spirit is wholly divided from any man that ever had it : but if he be divided he leaves them destitute , &c.
might pass without control ? it is well you thought so , but ( thanks be to god ) you are deceived in your expectation ; and truth though it hath found some difficulty and opposition at the press by your means
any good at all , it is not from our own power and strength , but from the assistance of god himself , who works in vs and with vs . that god loves vs not because we do deserve his love
censu , & vernalis cespi it is @ suspirat , de regno certus , de dominatione securus ? quid te mereri dubit as habere te , & possidere jam cogeris confiteri. quid ergo cum terra illi qui possidet coelum ? quid illi
not little flock , for it is your fathers will to give you a kingdom , he applies them thus unto the saints of god . quis de victu , quis de vestitu , quis de pleb_io censu , & vernalis cespi
of god : or else it is some desire of singularity or fame , or the hope of gain , honour , & preferment : one of these i may be bold to say is the cause that moves you to patronize
supports their souls : and it is such a grace as all the saints of god both may and ought to have without any special revelation , as appears by divers pregnant places of scripture , ( which for brevity sake i
saving faith , whose property it is , not only not to fail : luke 22 . 32 . but likewise to assume these promises of final and total perseverance to it self . fourthly , if this assertion were once admitted
of things not seen : it is a sure evidence of heaven and eternal life . wherefore those that have this faith , must not only believe , that god is , but also that he is a rewarder of all such
faith . for faith as it is defined . heb. 11 . 1 . is the substance of things hoped for , and the evidence of things not seen : it is a sure evidence of heaven and eternal life . wherefore
, this assertion , if it were admitted would utterly disanull , abolish and take away the very root and chief of graces , even true , justifying and saving faith . for faith as it is defined . heb. 11 .
cannot be lo_t . if it were notso , men could not prise it aboue earthly thing . this doctrine therefore of falling from the state of grace , it takes away the very excellency of grace , and so it would
. mark the words , it is impossible for such as fall totally from grace , to be renewed again unto repentance , they cannot be ingrafted into christ the second time . where then is the truth or comfort of your
in this point , and it is nothing so . for their having of grace bestowed on them heretofore , doth rather argue that god will therefore bestow grace on them no more , because they did not keep it at the
into christ , and therefore it is impossible for vs to be broken off from him : wee were once invested into the state of grace from which wee cannot fall , and therefore we are now in christ , wee are
in it now , because it is impossible for vs to fall from it : for this were quite contrary to this assertion : they dare not say , that they have committed no such sin as might disturb them from the
stood before , and so it is impossible for you to be renewed by repentance any more : your last end now shall be far worse then ever your bigin_ing was : and because that you have cast off god , he
now this position , if it were granted , would quite deprive the saints of god of all their happiness , it would strip and rob them of their graces , which are the only treasure of their souls , and make
fall from it again , it were impossible for them to be happy here . for happiness is such a stable and perpetual thing , as where it is once possessed , it cannot be lost . philosophers could say , that
saith it is ) if it were possible for christians for to loose this grace , and to fall from it again , it were impossible for them to be happy here . for happiness is such a stable and perpetual thing
( as the scripture saith it is ) if it were possible for christians for to loose this grace , and to fall from it again , it were impossible for them to be happy here . for happiness is such a
that this assertion , it it were admitted , would rob the lord of many faithful prayers which now his saints do make unto him for their perseverance ; and seeing it would make that very prayer which christ himself hath recorded
be done en earth as it is in heaven : leadivs not into temptation , but deliver vs from evil ; if god had no rule and sway over him , if god did not give him perseverance , and preserve his
and faithful prayers ? if it were in men's own power to take up , to preserve , and to reject their graces at their pleasures , what need men to pray to god at all ? if god doth nothing in
to reap the fruits ? it is christs own counsel and advise to all his saints . labour not for the food that perishes , but for that which endures unto eternal life . john 6 . 27 . and lay not
bestows upon them ; if it were not gods goodness , might and power , but their own strength , their own care and diligence that did preserve them , in the state of grace : if men could not be sure
it self . lastly , it is altogether impossible for such as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into christ either finally or totally to fall from grace , in respect of the many dangerous consequents which else would ineuitablie follow upon
grow and increase : therefore it is not of a growing and increasing nature : and therefore it follows not . but to answer punctually to this your argument ; grace in it self is always of a growing and increasing nature
and increase , and therefore it is not of a growing : and increasing nature . i answer , that the argument follows not . if a man should argue thus : trees do not always grow , especially in winter :
incorruptible and immortal nature : it is not the food and nourishment , but the very nature and essence of the things themselves , that makes them immortal and incorruptible . secondly , i answer . that grace and the food which
decay and perish : therefore it is not of a perpetual , permanent , and immortal nature . to this i answer : first , that the antecedent is false , for t_ese things that are of a _ding , and corruptible
decay with them . so it is with grace , the sense and feeling of it , the strength and vigour of it , the fruits and effects of it may be weakened , lessened , and suspended for a time ,
the whole : and so it is not of a divine , perpetual , and immortal nature . to which i answer first . that in grace there are these two parts : first , there are the seeds and habits of
or existence , but as it is in man . wherefore this your answer which would give grace a being , and subsistence of its own abstracted from its subject man , must needs be false and idle : and so the
needs be so likewise as it is in man , because it hath no being , no essence , no nature or existence , but as it is in man . wherefore this your answer which would give grace a being ,
own , but only as it is inherent in its proper subject man , if it be immortal , perpetual , and always persevering in its own nature , it must needs be so likewise as it is in man , because
it self , but as it is conjoined with its subject man : let grace be severed from man , or man from grace , then grace must needs perish and cease to be : it cannot subsist of it self ,
subsistence but in man : it is no substance , but an habit and quality , and therefore it hath no being , essence , or existence in it self , but as it is conjoined with its subject man : let
for to be the thing it is , especially is it be considered in a notion which is quite contrary to its nature : a thing that is immortal and perpetual in its own nature and essence , cannot be considered as
own nature , but yet it is not so in respect of vs : that it is perpetual always in it self , but not in vs . i answer , that if grace in its proper nature be perpetual , immortal
still - increasing nature ; it is always growing greater and greater , stronger and stronger , as we may see by these ensuing scriptures , iob 17 9 . psal. 84 . 7 . prou . 4 . 18 . john
their nature and immortality : it is the work of god , and therefore it shall be for ever , eccles . 3 . 12 . therefore it shall always as persevere , it cannot die nor have an end . secondly
of the holy ghost ; it is a part of their image , and it participates of their nature and immortality : it is the work of god , and therefore it shall be for ever , eccles . 3 . 12
out unto the end , it was but false and counterfeit and never true , because it wanted this perpetuity , this eniternity , immortality and perseverance , which is the very life and essence of all true grace . that which
22 . 32 . for it is kept by the very power of god , 1 pet . 1 . 5 . hence is it said of love , that it is as strong as death : that many waters cannot quench
in our hearts : so it is of a perpetual , incorruptible , divine and persevering nature , admitting of no final end , nor total interruption . hence it is that grace is stiled in the scriptures , the divine nature
and saving grace , as it is the immediate work and fruit of gods spirit in our hearts : so it is of a perpetual , incorruptible , divine and persevering nature , admitting of no final end , nor total interruption
from grace . sixtly , it is altogether impossible for such as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into christ , to fall finally or totally from grace , in respect of the very nature of grace it self . for first
at large before . therefore it is impossible for them either finally or totally to fall from grace . thus you see , how in regard of the very present estate and condition of the saints of god , who are once
mediation of iesus christ , it is impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . but all those who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into christ , they have all the inward and outward means that
endure for ever ) therefore it is impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . lastly , the true regenerate saints of god , they have all the inward and outward means and helps that may be
of the lord himself , it is impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . but all such as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into christ , they are established , settled and grounded in grace
cannot sin unto death , it is impossible for them either finally or totally to fall from grace . but all those who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into christ ; they cannot choose but always fear , obey , serve
any of gods elect , it is then impossible for any to seduce them ; and so their first evasion is but false , for the second evasion , that the elect saints of god cannot be finally seduced , i willingly
wonders cannot deceive them , it is impossible even for those to do it ; and therefore is it absolutely impossible for any thing to seduce them . thirdly , because the scriptures certify vs , that the beast , and antichrist
for these words , if it were possible , imply a more impos_ible impossibility then the word impossible doth . secondly , because the end and scope of the text is to prove as much . for if any thing could seduce
that these words , if it were possible , imply only a great difficulty , but not , an absolute impossibility . secondly , that it proves only , that they cannot be seduced finally , but it proves not that they
depart from him , and it is impossible to seduce them . from whence this eleventh argument doth arise . those that cannot depart away from god , nor yet be possibly seduced by any means , miracles or policies whatsoever ,
place of @ , seeing it is not stiled the book of life , but only gods book , must be intended to be the book of the li_ing , and not the book of life . thirdly , if you will
, and wished for . it is common for men to wish and desire things that are impossible out of passion and affection : these therefore being but wishes and desires , prove nothing at all against me . secondly , these
the book of life , it is impossible for them to fall quite away from grace : ( first because that god himself hath promised , that he will never blot out the names of those who are once truly registered in
5 . 10 . therefore it is impossible for them to fall finally or totally from grace . tenthly , the true regenerate saints of god , they have their names written in heaven , and in the book of li_e :
unto god the father , it is impossible for them to fall finally or totally from grace : for first those that are called effectually by god , they are called to salvation , and to the obtaining of the glory of
13 . 20 . therefore it is impossible for them to fall finally or totally from grace . this is an argument which in my judgment cannot be answered or euaded . ninthly , all those who are once truly regenerated and
love the brethren . therefore it is impossible for them either finally or totally to fall from grace . sixtly , those who are partakers of the first resurrection , those who are dead to sin , those who have put off
not come into condemnation , it is impossible for them either totally or finally to fall from grace . but all those who are once t_uly regenerated and ingrafted into christ , they have overcome the world , 1 ioh . 4
16 . 17 . therefore it is altogether impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . fiftly , the saints of god have overcome the world , they are taken out of the world , and made
5 , 6 . therefore it is altogether impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . fourthly , the saints of god they have a new heart , a new spirit , and a new nature put
and precious corner stone , it is impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . for the scriptures are express in it , that all such as are built and founded upon christ , shall never be
. 9 . and therefore it is altogether impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . thirdly , those that are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into christ , they are built upon a rocks : they
truly borne of god , it is altogether impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . for first , if they are the sons of god , then are they also heirs , and co - _eires
3 . 9 . therefore it is altogether impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . secondly , they are borne of god , and are sons of god , and therefore they can never fall :
cannot be rooted out : it is altogether impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace ; but all those that are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into christ , they are partakers of the divine nature ,
4 . 11 . therefore it is altogether impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . this argument i do not so much rely upon , because this protection of the angels is principally of the bodies
ghost himself . fourthly , it is altogether impossible for the saints of god that are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into christ either totally or finally to fall from grace in respect of the angels , who do always guard them
every holy duty . therefore it is altogether impossible for them to fall from grace : and thus you see how true this doctrine and position must needs be true in respect of the holy ghost himself . fourthly , it is
of every holy duty , it is impossible for them to fall from grace . but the spirit of god doth always make intercession to god for those that are truly regenerated and ingrafted into christ , and doth always assist them
4 . 20 . therefore it is impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . lastly , the intercession and assistance of gods spirit , may ground and settle vs in this present truth : for the
evil that they would : it is impossible for them either _inally or totally to fall from grace . but all those who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into christ , are always led , guided , and directed by the
shall receive . fourthly , it is such a thing as can never be taken from vs . let the bargain or the contract hold or break , the earnest still remains with him that doth receive it : he that gives
his promise . secondly , it is a badge and sign of true and upright dealing , and it gives an assurance , that the bargain shall be punctually performed to the utmost by him that gives the earnest . thirdly ,
vs in heaven : whence it is stiled the earnest of our inheritance until the purchased possession be really bestowed upon vs , eph . 1 . 14 . 15 . secondly , because it makes the saints of god confident and
vnchangable then nature is . it is such a thing as doth make them new men and new creatures , it puts a new nature and disposition into them , so that they cannot alter or destroy it if they would .
put into them , because it is an other nature , yea a thing more permanent & vnchangable then nature is . it is such a thing as doth make them new men and new creatures , it puts a new nature
have once rece_ued , because it is every way hurtful for them , and there is no colour of any good to do it , now they cannot will that which is every way hurtful for them ; because the will cannot
needs be false , because it is contrary and repugnant to the nature of the thing supposed . thirdly , the scope of the apostle in this place , is only to prove , that those that are once truly regenerated and
now disputed . secondly , it is but a mere nugation and tautology , and in effect no more then this : that those that are borne of god cannot sin or fall from grace , as long as they do not
applied . for first , it is only a denying of the conclusion , for which this scripture is alleged , and a mere begging of the question now disputed . secondly , it is but a mere nugation and tautology ,
but briefly now , as it is applied to these particular places of scripture . i say therefore , that this answer is but false and idle , and contrary and repugnant to these places of scripture , to which it is
in their hearts ; therefore it is impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . the mayor proposition is warrented by these two reasons . first , because the seed and annoynting of gods spirit they are
spirit in their hearts , it is altogether impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . but all those who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into christ , they have the seed and annoynting of gods
, and resisted , as it is evident by psal. 51 . 11 . 1 thess . 5 . 19 . ephes . 4 30 . and act . 7 . 51 . i answer that it is true , that the
and dwell for ever , it is altogether impossible for them either finally or totally to fall from grace : because as long as they have the holy ghost within them , there is always grace within them . but the holy
into him . thirdly , it is altogether impossible in respect of the holy ghost , that those that are once truly regenerated , should either totally or finally fall from grace . now in the holy ghost there are these things
continual presence , and therefore it is altogether impossible for them to fall from grace . the minor proposition cannot be denied ; the mayor like wise must be true , else you must make christ iesus that great , good ,
. 14 . and as it was with the children of israel , when they marched toward the temporal canaan , so is it with all those that are once truly regenerated in their marching toward the heavenly : iesus christ ,
of grace : and therefore it is altogether impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . if it be objected , that this prayer of christ doth only tend to keep them from a final , but
their constant & continual perseverance it is evident : luke 22 . 32 , 33 . where christ tells peter that he had prayed for him that his faith might not fail , which prayer of christ extends to all his faithful
and ingrafted into him ; it is plain and evident by john 16 . 26 . rom. 8 . 24 . hebr. 2 . 17 . cap. 4 . 14 . 15 , 16 . cap. 7 . 25 . and cap.
may always persevere : therefore it is altogether impossible for them , either finally , or totally to fall from grace . for the mayor proposition no man can deny it , unless he will maintain ( as the rhemists did in
they may continueally persevere , it is altogether impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . but christ himself doth make perpetual intercession to his father , for all those that are once truly regenerated and ingrafted
him . secondly , as it is altogether impossible in respect of god himself , that those which are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into christ by a true and lively faith , should either totally or finally fall from grace :
this evasion of theirs if it were admitted , would utterly subvert and overturn , the very grounds , principles and foundation of religion . secondly , if this their shifting answer should be admitted , it would make the word of
be done on earth as it is in heaven ; and lead vs not into temptation , but deliver us from evil ? this prayer were but vain & idle if our wills were our own , if god had no kingdom
and the wicked . true it is , ( saith he ) there are many that made an outward show of trusting in god , but yet their hearts were not upright , such as these , they turn aside unto their
forth by a comparison , it is as stable and firm as mount zion , which cannot be removed , but stands fast for ever . which proves , that this is not only a promise of god , but likewise a
their exposition & gloss upon it were true ? for if this promise ( as they pretend ) doth not establish & settle christians in the state of grace , and give them full & comfortable assurance , that when they are
be admitted . secondly , it is but a mere @ and nugation : the promise certifieth vs , that the righteous shall never be removed , that @ cannot be re e , that he shall stand fast for ever ;
of this promise , as it is : let vs apply their gloss and exposition to it , ( if they continue righteous and trust still in god : or as long as they continue righteous , and trust in god :
safe enough before . so it is hear : these three original promises when once wee do truly believe , repent and receive christ iesus , they are the original charters that give vs a full , sure , and perfect interest
be referred . but now it is far otherwise , with those spiritual covenants and promises which god doth make unto his children in positive and absolute words : because all these promises they have reference unto gods gracious goodness , mercy
should follow sin , though it were absolutely denounced : therefore all those judgments that are absolutely denounced against men without any annexed condition , have commonly an employed condition included in them , because they have relation and reference to our
the praemises : ) therefore it is impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . lo here what a multitude of sweet and heavenly promises there are throughout the scriptures , which may fully assure and resolve
judgements and do them , it is impossible for them either finally or totally to fall from grace . but god hath covenanted with all such as are once truly regenerated , with all such as are his children , that he
john 6: 37: therefore , it is impossible for them , either finally , or totally to fall from grace . if you object , that though god will never forget , never forsake them , or cast them out , yet
cap: 4: 4 . therefore it is impossible for them to fall finally or totally from grace . i will speak more largely of this hereafter , and therefore i will pass it over now . the seventh sort of promises which
and abide in christ , it is impossible for them to fall finally , or totally from grace ; but god hath promised that iesus christ and the holy ghost shall dwell and abide for @ in the hearts and souls of
2 . 19 . therefore it is impossible for them , either finally or totally to fall from grace . what can be here replied , i cannot yet conjecture . the fourth sort of promises that make for my present purpose
grow greater and stronger ; it is impossible for them , either finally , or totally to fall from grace . but god hath promised , that all such who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into christ by a true and
our works for vs ; it is he , and not our selves , that doth preserve vs from falling , and work this grace of perseverance in vs . i_ay 26 . 12 . and phil : 4 . 13 .
is borne of god : it is the new birth and the seed of grace , not men's freewill , that doth keep them from committing sin , and cause them for to persevere in grace : they do not bear the
judgments and do them : it is god himself , and not man , that doth cause the issue and event : so in the 1 john 3 . 9 . whosoever is borne of god , doth not commit sin ;
causes of mans perseverance : it is evident by ezech . 36 . 27 . where god makes the same covenant , in effect , with his children , as he doth here . i ( saith god ) will give you
, but god himself : it is the fear of god and the new heart which god doth put into him , that keeps man from apostasy ; and not man himself : the prophet makes the fear of god , not
with vs . ) but it is an entire covenant , made by god himself , both for himself and vs , wherein he covenants for vs , as well as for himself , to vs , and to himself : this
, 14 . fourthly , it is a prayer proceeding always from faith , and from a sincere and upright heart ; it is a prayer , that is for the most part accompained , with fervency , and zeal of heart
14: 15 . thirdly , it is a prayer according to the will of god , therefore god cannot but hear and grant it : 1: john 5 . 23 , 14 . fourthly , it is a prayer proceeding always from
be done in earth as it is in heaven , they do in it , both pray to god to give them perseverance , and to keep them : to , that they may never finally , nor totally fall from grace
in this behalf : therefore it is altogether impossible for them either finally , or totally to fall from grace . the mayor cannot be denied , for then this contradiction must necessarily follow , that god should always give regenerate men
requests in this behalf , it is altogether impossible for the either @ , or @ @ all from grace . but all those who are once truly regenerated , and ingrafted into christ by a true and lively faith , do
and less necessary end . it is the part of fools and not of wisemen to redress one small and little inconvenience with many great and dangerous mischieses : wherefore , seeing that god at the most should remedy but one small
perseverance of his saints , it is his chiefes_g lory , and his souls delight , to see his children continue and stand fast in grace , and to hold out unto the end : wherefore , seeing that it is gods
fall quite from it , it is most evident and plain . for how can it ever stand with the honour and glory of gods infinite and boundless mercy , with the glory and honour of his almighty power , with the
them to fall from , it is most evident for iesus christ hath purc_sed eternal redemption and salvation for the @ with his precious blood he hath satisfied his fathers wrath for them unto the fill , being made a curse for
the first of these , it is evident by isay 55 . 3 . where gods spiritual mercies to his children are stiled , the sure mercies of dauid : the seed of grace which is sown in the hearts of all
children upon all occasions , it is his chiefest delight and joy for to dispense the riches and treasures of his mercy to his saints . ezech . 18 . 23 . cap. 33 . 11 . micah . 7 . 18
. 10 . thirdly , it is infinite , there is an infinite store of it , which is never drawn dry . exod . 34 . 6 , 7 . psa . 103 . 8 . psal. 130 . 7 .
, 6 . secondly , it is permanent and constant , it endures for ever , and admits not of any total change or interruption . psa . 103 . 17 . psa . 100. 5 . psa . 118 . 4
and of free grace , it is not wrested or merited by vs from god : exod . 33 . 19 . hosea . 14 . 5 . john 3 . 8 . rom. 9 . 15 . 19 . and ephes
the freeness of it : it is voluntary and of free grace , it is not wrested or merited by vs from god : exod . 33 . 19 . hosea . 14 . 5 . john 3 . 8 . rom.
needs dwell too , because it is a fruit of the spirit , and it can not be severed from the spirit . rom. 5 . 5 . gal. 5 . 22 . ephs . 3 . 16 , 17 . 1
away from god , because it is the absolnte and positive will of god that they should not depart from him . ier . 32 . 40 psa . 85 . 8 . john 6 . 39 . rom. 3 11 .
. 2: 5 . now it is the will of god and christ , that the saints should always persevere and never fall from grace ; and therefore it must needs be their will too , because their wills are subordinate ,
perpetual love , only because it is his will and pleasure so to do , there men can never utterly deprive themselves of this love of god : this love is grounded not upon their merits , but upon his own free
men for ever , because it is his will and pleasure so to do : in the first case its true that men must first embrace gods love before that they can have it , and if they chance for to cast
them to fall totally , it is perpetual and everlasting , therefore he will not permit them to fall finally from him : the perpetual and everlasting objects of gods love , can never be the perpetual and everlasting objects of his
love of god : wherefore it is impossible for them , either totally , or finally to fall from grace . our subtle sophisters have nothing here to answer , but their crambemillies coctum , that god doth love all such as
to them in christ . it is pauls express challenge , rom: 8: 35: who shall seperate vs from the love of christ ? shall tribulation , or distress , or persecution , or famine , or nakedness or sword ? nay
my premises , and so it is no answer but a shift and cauell . if you object , that all these places are meant of a temporal protection from worldly dangers . i answer , that the most of them if
of this my argument : it is only a deny all of my conclusion , not of my premises , and so it is no answer but a shift and cauell . if you object , that all these places are meant
hands of god , as it is for any outward thing to do it . first , because christ himself tells vs , that no man can pluck them out of his father hands : if no man can do it ,
of god unto salvation , it is altogether impossible for them either finally , or totally to fall from grace . but all such as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into christ by a true & lively faith , they are
they were not so , it were not in the power of regenerate men to make them so , but it hath only reference to regenerate men themselves , or to election and vocation , as they have reference to regenerate men
in the scriptures . first it is taken for the free love and mercy of god in christ iesus : secondly , it is taken for the graces which are wrought in men by the holy ghost : in this latter sense
fall from grace , &c. it is the express voice and testimony both of the spirit and the word of god , that in the latter times and ages of the world , there shall be some false teachers in the church
regenerate mans estate : wherein it is proved by sundry arguments , reasons , and authorities , that such as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into christ by a true and lively faith , can neither finally , nor totally fall
depart from god , and it is impossible for any to seduce them . page , 107 . twelfthly , they cannot choose but serve and please the lord : and they can never sin unto death , page . 109 .
or distrubing of it : it was only to defend , propagate and establish the truth of god & the doctrine of our church , and not to quell them and suppress them . who then are those who violate and transgress
idle and impertinent ; because it is but a mere evasion and waiuing of the controversy , a mere calumny and reproach , and a falling foul upon the persons of sincere and upright christians who defend it , for want of
the gentiles , so now it is with puritans , among such as seem to be christians : ( ) non scelus aliquod in causa est , sed nomen : et solius nominis crimen est : that puritans are hated , contemned
, or resell them . it is recorded of ( ) certain of the synagogue of the libertines and @ , who disputed with that holy martyr , saint steven , that when as they were not able to resist the wisdom
should say , would god it were mor_ing ; for the fear of their heart wherewith they should fear , and for the sight of their eyes which they should see ; they should then find no ease , no rest or
they should say , would it were even , and at even they should say , would god it were mor_ing ; for the fear of their heart wherewith they should fear , and for the sight of their eyes which they
utterly be lost , if it were a transitory and fading good , men would not , nay , men could not love it or affect it ; they would not part with any other thing to win and purchase it :
to all men , and it is of great use and moment , even in their very practice of @ . yea , i will affirm it , that there is no one thing @ which will more @ men in the
and to determine ; but it is a practical error , and a point which trencheth far into the practice of christianity : it is a point and error that concerns not only the learnedest , but the very lowest and meanest
aboue the rest , because it is not ( as some surmise ) a notional and speculative error , fit only for schools and schollers to know , and to determine ; but it is a practical error , and a point
aboue the rest , because it is an error of greatest consequence . for it derogates very much from all gods great and holy attributes ; from his glory , mercy , honour , goodness , truth , wisdom , justice ,
of pelagianisme heretofore , and it is but a point of pure popery , and arminianisme now : and therefore i presumed that i might with greater boldness and audacity , and with less offence to any , adventure to revel it
into christ by a lively faith , can neither finally nor totally fall from grace .
his bawdy thievish court . it is written my house shall be called an house of prayer , but ye have made it a den of thieves ; which excommunication is of record in s_archamber ; of our bishops commanding . wo
preachers of his word when it is most necessary and useful , and to countenance , justify , and set up popery , superstition , idolatry , error and disorder ( the chief causes of our plagues ) even in these days
miserably gelded it , after it was new printed , in sundry particulars . first , they have purged out the prayer for seasonable weather ; one cause of the shipwrecks , & tēpestuous unseasonable weather ever since its publication . secondly
of the pestilence , when it was most acceptable and requisi_e ; so , to show their inveterate malice against preaching ( the thing that the devil wrastleth most against all whose study hath been to decay the office of preaching ,
will they do thus ? it is not unlikely , because they have been such expert practisioners in such kind of fea_es . for all the world shall be set in a flame and combustion , rather then one spark shall cindge their
god for it , yet it was without any promise of good success . but thirdly , a general fast must be proclaimed over the land , and a solemn day must be kept in offering up the burnt offerings of an
take , or follow , it is but such , whereof david thus speaks , the lord brings the council of the heathen to nought , be makes the devises of the people of none effect , and casts out the counsels
speaking in his word . it is a dangerous thing , and impious too , for men to neglect gods council , and follow their own . this is a sign of a people given up of god : as the lord
to hinder it . whereas it is not so with the building of babel . for one small breath of the mouth of god in his word , breathed by one poor minister , is able to blast the building ; and
are comprehended many , for it is a mystery : yet one is mentioned ( chap . 2 . 1 . ) because ( i say ) it holds proportion with the vision . again , if by the angel here ,
not so here ? nay it is so here : for though he write as to one , v. 1 . yet v. 7 . he concludes the epistle thus , he that hath an ear , let him hear what the
. what then ? ergo it is an office of prelates to set the church in order , by adding such ceremenies or canons , as are wanting . as the prelate saith in his said book , that he had taken
heaven , whose office alone it is to make intercession within the veil , as was typed by the high priest , heb. 9 . but the pope also makes himself the high priest on earth , in forgiving of sins ,
18 . little children , it is the last time , and as ye have heard that antichrist shall come , even now are there many antichrists , whereby we know that it is the last time . they went out from
is apostasy from christ . it is in 1 io . 2 . 18 . little children , it is the last time , and as ye have heard that antichrist shall come , even now are there many antichrists , whereby
in the aposiles time , it is manifest by sundry places of scripture . as 2 . cor . 11 . 20 . ye suffer ( saith the apostle to the corinthians ) if a man bring you into bondage , if
and became to be as it were an embryo or little mass , but did not receice the form of a body , till afterwards , and was long a growing up , until it came to the full stature . now
&c. and a great weakness it is , not to see the strength , which ceremonies add even to religion itself , &c. so and much more the prelate_ whence it appears , that had he not ceremonies to garnish his worship
infancy of the gospel , it is no rule for us to follow now , after so long a shining forth of the gospel . and i might add this moreover , that the apostles did not this alone , but with
on the cross , as it is an alteration , yea and an annihilation of this sacrament , which is to be administered as a supper , on a table , not as a sacrifice , on an altar . and this
first for their doctrine , it was sound and sincere , the very word of god , which they preached with all diligence , and good conscience ; exhorting other ministers also to the like diligence and faithfulness in preaching : as
the scripture , as if it were a dumb , dead , and blind iu_ge , having not so much light in it , as is sufficient to demonstrate it to be the word of god , but what it must be
testimony of the scripture , it is without light , a counterfeit spirit , a lying spirit . and this is that very spirit of antichrist , and of his prelates , who to advance their own canons and decrees , and
according to this word , it is because there is no light in them . whatever spirit men brag of , not indurcing the law and testimony of the scripture , it is without light , a counterfeit spirit , a lying
is preserved , and as it were nourished in us by the continual ministration of the food of the same word in our souls : or in a word , the holy ghost hath no operation in us , either for instruction
this holy ghost is as it were , nourished and preserved in us by and through the word of god , even as the light of the lamp is nourished by the oil , or as the breath goes with the voice
preaching ( so far as it is necessary for the salvation of gods chruch to the end of the world ) is by them left in writing to be a rule of our faith , and the ground of all holy and
have a little ( as it were ) digressed , though not impertinent to our purpose in hand , which is to show the true difference between the true ministers of christ , and those of antichrist . seventhly , therefore ,
true shepherds , so as it is with them , no penny , no pater noster ; they look more to their tithes , then to their task , and more after the sleece , then for the good of the flock
this , i say , it is a thing impossible for them to feed the flock of god . for some of them have four or five hundred flocks within their diocese , some more_ some less , which they never once
souls to god , but it is the strong bias of ambition and covetousness , pride , and vain glory , and love of the world , that draws them to a bishopricke . nor secondly , is it an outward calling
, because , first , it is not any zeal of gods glory , or desire to win souls to god , but it is the strong bias of ambition and covetousness , pride , and vain glory , and love of
iniquity . and thirdly , it was contradicted by sundry ; as by @ . but you will presently say , that epiphanius ranks him ( even for that very opinion only , that he held prelates not to be de jure
dic mibi , si fi_l it is lee , qualis eris_ tell me , if thou thy self were a lion , what manner of man would thou be ? so the prelate imagines , that if any of those , that
none themselves , as if it were only a matter of envy . but as the poet said , dic mibi , si fi_l it is lee , qualis eris_ tell me , if thou thy self were a lion , what manner
one maine sea ( as it were ) one catholic church . and this is that unity and peace , the benefit of both the constitution , and preservation whereof is to be ascribed to the hierarchy of prelates over their inferior
nay out of all doubt it is not the least reason , why de facto they have so little success , because de jure they have no power given . according to that in the prophet . behold ( saith the lord
out of all doubt , it is not the least reason , why de facto he hath so little success , because de jure he hath no power given : so i may say as truly of all prelates ( who challenge
in the apostolical churches . it was christs rule , tell it to the church , that is , to the congregation ; and if the offender will not hear the congregation , he is excommunicate by and out of the congregation
manner of it , as it is used in the church of england , is a discipline antichristian , as being against that form of excommunication , which is prescribed in the word of god , and was practised in the apostolical
true church of christ , it were argument and cause sufficient to seperate from her . and that because , secondly , he that is a true seperatist from her , for the former respects , may justly condemn her for antichristianisme
do , say they ? it is not suitable for our times . thus bernard . but we need go no further , then to the painter , whom the pope set a work in his gallery to draw the pictures of
to gods ministers . now it was not unusual with the heathen to call their kings , who were the greatest tyrants , and oppressors of the people , benefactors , or the like , in flattery of them . thus they
thing as you ask , it is not mine to give , i have no such commission from my father to bestow upon you any such thing , as worldly prelacy ; that's no part of my kingdom , nor of the
to this only . for it were to tread an endless maze , to go about to prove a divine title , or authority out of the volumes of humane writings , or ecclesias_icall histories . they can tell us de facto
one man to another , it was merely humane still . and the great primate , the now champion of the church of england as he bears himself in his _a_e book ( his relation of the conference ) confesses thus much
concerning prelaticall authority , whence it is , and if it shall appear by clear evidence of scripture , justly compared with their prelaticall properties , and practises , that they are the seed of antichrist , the mystery of iniquity ;
, or quarterly , and it is much if they preach annually , and then only at court : others of them ( as our great archprelates ) not in three or four years space or more ; some not at all
can inform you . and it is so far from being their meat and drink , that it is their least thought and care , their least desire and endeavour , their greatest trouble , pain and purgatory to preach gods word
@ gave this answer . it is not the man_er of the romans to deliver any man to die , before he which is accused , have the accusers face to face , and have license to answer for himself , concerning
, and d. guyn whether it were fit to be received ; only he told them , he would have no dispute of the point ; which is all one , as if his grace had said ; i will have no
in writing , saying , it was too long , and he durst not take it . hereupon he contracted it into less then a sheet of paper and tendered it to him as his answer . he refused it the second
or became not such , it was only from the overruling sanctifying grace of gods spirit in their hearts before and after they were made lord prelates , not from this very lordly office , pomp , power , and function it
children ) as soon as it was borne . rev. 12 . 4 , 5 . thus those lordly prelates do ; no sooner can the church be reddy to be delivered of a man - child , of a godly faithful
parish churches , as if it were gods own @ & law , to spur up yea precipitate the people to al manner of disorder , & the profanation of gods own sacre_ day , to the ruin both of their souls
unto them why ? for it is impossible to preach christ , except thou preach against antichrist , that is to say , them which with their false doctrine and violence of sword enforce to quench the true doctrine of christ .
hands . but i would it were , you could prove me a liar , and that you followed any of the apostles saving iudas only . yea , i would that you were in certain points as good as iudas was
; if not , as it was no railing or slander in christ , to call iudas a devil john 6 . 70 . and to tell the iewes that they wereof their father the divel john . 8 . 44 .
good use of it . it is the first degree of reformation , to discover your enormities to you ; ( this is my part , not yours ; lo i have here performed it . ) the next degree is ,
gather into your farthel , it is for st. peter , for the peace of the church , and for the defence of your patrimony and the crucifix ; & therefore ye may lawfully do it . ye may promote your cardinals
of mischief , even as it is our will ye should . and ye take much pains for lucres sake in our service , and especially to destroy the christian faith . for now the lay people are almost in doubt what
at iesus christ . and it is a pitiful case to see these profane subdeties of heretics to take place in religion , which were ridiculous in all other trade of life . when wee hear our prince or sovereign named ,
portuasses and mass - books it is repeated 12 , 20 , & 30 , if not 40 times together ) so often men must bow their knees : for which doctrine write calvin and marlorat , they are more than ridiculous
genere entis ; ) because it is neither a ceremony , nor a duty of the text , as i have there sufficiently proved . which phrase of speech , to call something in genere entis , nothing ; that is ,
in his mouth , whence it was afterwards thus engraven in golden letters in his heart , not in his knees , in which it had been undoubtedly written , had he used to bow and cringe unto it . this fable
any sign at all , it is only a sign of a spiritual repasting place , or of an heavenly banquet , where in christ doth spiritually distribute his body & blood , with all the benefits of his passion , to
tables or altars , so it is a mere ridiculous absurdity for the communion table is not a sign of the high priests palace , nor yet of golgatha , nor of the cross , therefore it's no sign of the place
oft have answered ; so it is impertinent to the present purpose , because the kings chair of estate , and so the bowing to it , is but a civil thing ; whereas the communion - table ( made of wood
of estate on earth , it is in the hearts and souls of his elect . in which he dwells , and reigns . he is on the communion table , ( and that only when the consecrated bread and wine at
lawfully bow unto it : it is an absurd argument . our lord iesus his chair of estate is only at his fathers own right hand , were he now sits and raig_es in glory : heaven is his throne , earth
p: 204 . ergo , it is not so excellent , so venerable as his name christ . fourthly , that name , which doth difference our saviour from all others who were called iesus , and give him an excellency ,
and to others . therefore it is more honourable than iesus . thirdly , that name which was given to christ in regard of his incarnation and humanity only , is not so excellent , so venerable , as that which is
to worship , &c. because it was humbled most , and therefore most advanced above all other names , yea above the name of god , or christ . the falseness of which position that you may more evidently discern , i
into his glory ? thus it is written , and thus it behooveth christ [ not iesus ] to suffer , and to rise from the dead the third day . and hence the minister by our churches appoinment , in the
which himself doth follow , it is both ens and verum too . ibidem , he averres , that primasius saith nothing on rom: 14 . yet he hath a commentary on that chapter ; and on the 11 verse he writes
which of all other times it is most needless to express men's reverence , subjection , and high respect to iesus : because every part of divine service , especially kneeling in prayer , prayers unto iesus , and in the name
of after - claps . it is not the common use of adverse writers , to acquaint one another privately with their slips before hand ; but my love and mildness towards you is such , in regard wee were once fellow
how false , how vain it is . this ( my dear mother ) was the survey of some few printed pages of mr. widows his confutation , which i sent enclosed in my letrer to your vice - chancellor , who
) christo genu flectere : it is an ecclesiastical use to pray kneeling to christ : ergo to bow at the name of iesus . risum teneatis amici ? is not this more ridiculous then ignoramus ? page 16 , 17 .
and for the chapter , it is cap: 2: not cap: decet : 6 . so that his correction is false , my quotation true . for the perverting of pope gregories words , i must needs reply , that i have
, cap: 2: and so it is in my appendix too , in most copies ; if it be not so in his , let him blame the printer , not my self ; so that the book is not misquoted by
the book right : for it is there , sexti decretalia , lib: 3 , tit : 23 , cap: 2: and so it is in my appendix too , in most copies ; if it be not so in his ,
these winter - nights . it was my chance in my late passage through oxford towards london , to hear , that this ridiculous pamphlet , ( which made mirth enough in writing ) was newly preferred ( and that by public
may believe the title ) it is imprinted , there being nothing in it fit for other men's use , unless it be to make them laugh these winter - nights . it was my chance in my late passage through oxford
publication of them , when it is too late . for mine own part , i desire not to crush mr. widows his infant in the cradle , as though i feared it , there being nothing in it worthy the press
at your death . pity it is to see how many ingenious youths and girls ; how many young ( that i say not old ) gentlemen and gentlewomen of birth and quality , ( as if they were borne for no
in practise . and since it was the most notorious character of christians heretofore , to abominate , to abandon players , plays and play-houses ; let it be your honour , your piety , your practical badge of christianity to forsake
the objection true ; yet it were far better for you to die , to starve , then any ways to live by sin or sinful courses . there is no absolute necessity at all that men should live ; but there
large in this particular as it was then . lastly , admit the objection true ; yet it were far better for you to die , to starve , then any ways to live by sin or sinful courses . there is
they but be industrious : it is therefore players idleness , their love of vanity & sinful pleasures , not want of other callings , that is the ground of this objection . thirdly , admit there were no other course of
else maintain themselves ; so it is no good plea for players . no man must live by any sinful profession ; nor yet do evil that good may come of it : therefore you must not maintain your selves by acting
depart as a scroll when it is rolled together , and the elements melt with fervent heat ; when every mountain and i stand shall be moved out of their places , yea the earth also and the works that are therein
, and the night wherein it was said , there is a man - child conceived ! why dyed we not from the womb , why did we not give up the ghost when we came out of the belly , before
them . fiftly , because it is an apparent occasion of many great sins and mischiefs ; as loss of time , prodigality , effeminacy , whoredom , adultery , unchaste desires , lustful speculations , luxury , drunkenness , profaneness ,
report : thirdly , because it is contrary to our christian vow in baptism , to forsake the devil and all his works , the pomps and vanities of this wicked world and all the sinful lusts of the flesh , of
are . thirdly , as it is lawful to pen , so likewise to recite , to read such tragical or comical poëms as these , composed only to be read , not acted on the stage . and in truth the
of natural genius ; so it is likewise lawful , yea useful and commendable among christians , if righly used : as not only the divine hymmes recorded in scripture , together with the famous ancient poëms of tertullian , arator ,
judgment then ? since therefore it is vndeniably e_ident by all the premises : that stage - plays are those pomps , and works of the devil , and idoles ; those pomps , and vanities of this wicked world , and
and pomps of satan ; it is infallibly evident : for first , they were invented by him : secondly , he did exact , and require them of , and extort them from his worshippers . thirdly , they were consecrated
their good . fiftly , it is but a mere sophistical , and deceitful apology , to argue thus for stage - plays : they may be regulated , and reduced to good , and lawful uses ; therefore they are lawful
- plays can produce : it is then but folly , and madness , yea , sin in christians to retain them ; though they have hopes for to reform them , because their evil would still exceed their good . fiftly
: it is bootless , it is hopeless therefore for any christian to attempt , or undertake their reformation : and so this replication is but vain . fourthly , these stage - plays are very like to poison : vt laedant
utterly to abolish them : it is bootless , it is hopeless therefore for any christian to attempt , or undertake their reformation : and so this replication is but vain . fourthly , these stage - plays are very like to
credited : ) when as it was the chiefest badge and character of a christian , to refrain from stage - plays : yea , this was one great crime which the pagans did object against the christians in the primitiue church
augustines time , even so it is now : whosoever is but displeased , and offended with them , is presently reputed for a common enemy : he that speaks against them , or comes not at them , is forthwith branded
numero qui erat impiorum . it was this fathers speech of those play - haunters whom he endeavoured to reclaim in his time ; and it shall be mine of ours now ; whose conversion i shall truly pray for , how
them are heterogeniall , yet it is no absurdity by way of digression , to touch on such parti_ulars , as other writers oft times do , yea and the fathers too , who have their digressions as well as others ,
condition of the other : it is no impertinentie therefore for me to discourse at large of all or any of these , the better to display the odiousness of stage - plays , with which they have great analogy , to
et accusare non possit . it was this fathers preface to his play - condemning treatise , and it shall be my apology . to the fourth of these , i answer ; that there are several passages in this discourse ,
peccant in this kind , it is only out of too much lo_e to do the readers greater good : who if they complain for want of time , may soon peruse it without any loss , by devoting their play -
a subject : but as it was no disparagement to phoebus his palace ; that the workmanship of it did exceed the matter ; so i hope it will be no prejudice to this treatise , if malo nodo malus cuneus ,
of a misinformed prejudice . it is not i suppose unknown to any , what favour , what estimation plays and players have lately purchased in the opinions and hearts of most ; which i fear are so strangely forestalled , so
ultimus in executione , yet it was primus in intention , of all my printed treatises , as some scattered passages against stage - plays in my former impressions , evidence . for having upon my first arrival here in london ,
be otherwise ? we know it was the received opinion of the ancient pagans ; that their devil - idols ( to whose solemn honour and worship , all stage - plays were at first devoted ) were so well pleased with
the very best it is but idle , frothy , superfluous , unprofitable ; as vain , as e_pty , as vanity it self . from whence i raise this eleventh dispute . that whose stile and subject matter ,
the emperors themselves : as it was lawful heretofore among the athenians , for those who accompanied their triumphs and shows in wagons , to scoff at any they met withal , which liberty of _c_f_ing , ( as ovid testifies )
close up this scene . it is recorded of one porph_ry a pagan stage - player , that he grew to such an height of impiety , as he adventured to baptize himself in _est upon the stage , of purpose to
it , and so perchance it was no sin at all in him . honorius augustodunensis , an author of some credit among the romanists , in his book , de antiquo ritu missarum . lib. 1 . cap. 83 . the
deserves gods heaviest judgements : it is storied , of theopompus an historian , and of theodect_s a tragaedian ; tha_ god struck the one of them with madness , the other with blindness for a season : the one , for
not worthy the enjoying . it is an excellent saying of bernard : gustato spiritu , necesse est desipere carnem : affectanti caelestia , terrena non sapiunt : aeternis inhanti , fastidio sunt transitoria . revera illud verum & solum est gaudium
terminating in eternal bliss . it is recorded of the wicked , iob 21 .12 , 13 . that they take the timbrel and harp , and rejoice at the sound of the organ : they spend their days in wealth and
before adams fall , so it is altogether _ilthy , stinking , and corrupted since , more apt to be inflamed with any lascivious amorous speeches , gestures , plays and interludes , then tinder , gun - powder , flax ,
. but mans nature as it was capable of pollution at the first , before adams fall , so it is altogether _ilthy , stinking , and corrupted since , more apt to be inflamed with any lascivious amorous speeches , gestures
gospel of christ , so it is a means to harden vicious play - haunters , to encourage and draw on many spectators unto stage - plays , who are polluted , vitiated , and made worse by them : whose _ins
plays and play-houses , as it is scandalous and offensive to gods church , gods saints , and u_beseeming the gospel of christ , so it is a means to harden vicious play - haunters , to encourage and draw on many
at the last , though it were sweet and luscious for the present , ) yet when terrors of conscience , death , and judgements , when crosses and afflictions shall thoroughly awaken them ; when god shall set all their sins
it is hardly discerned whiles it is growing , till time hath brought it to maturity . nemo repent fit tu pissimus : is as true as ancient . no man becomes extremely vicious on a sudden , but by unsensible gradations
lust or lewdness : therefore it is not ill . an objection made in chrysostomes time , as well as now . to this i answer first ; that play - haunters are no meet judges in this case , because most
voluptatem facilius vitia surrepunt . it was seneca his resolution to his friend lucilius , when he requested his advice , what thing he would have him principally to avoid ; and it may be a satisfactory answer to this objection .
on plays and sports , it is past and gone before we discern it move . and shall we then be so desperately prodigal of our lives , our rich and peerless hours , as to plot , to study how to
whiles wee sit still ; it is always flying more swift then any post , whiles we are eating , drinking , sleeping , playing , and think not of its haste : yea so swift winged is it ubi per luxum
from his hearts : so it is but an idle false surmise . for first , every man who resorts to plays , comes with a resolution to hear and see the whole play acted , not one particular scene or act
shall truly weight , what it is to do a thing , only for honest recreation , and what necessary ingredients and circumstances all lawful recreations must have , every honest lawful recreation must have these conditions : first the object ,
father of lies : since it is directly opposite to the spirit and word of truth , which enjoyneth every man , ( especially the children of god ) : to speak no lies ; to put away lying : to refuse
, goods and names : it is no discretion then for men to hazard the loss , the damage of their souls , for such petty improvements of their bodies . sixtly , there is little or no analogy between the action
the good , uncertain : it is no wisdom , no safety therefore to plunge men into sundry great and certain evils , to achieve some probable mean emoluments . fiftly , the good that comes by penning or acting plays ,
them perfect orators . therefore it is both lawful , yea and useful to . to this i answer first : that this objection makes only for academical and private , but nought for popular interludes . secondly , academical stage -
our disco_rses . moreover , it is the express precept of the apostle paul , ( whom many profane ones will here tax of puritanism ) eph . 4.29 . &c. 5.3 , 4 . but fornication and all uncleanesse , or
of lady venus , suddenly it is set on fire as tow or flax . many do read the verses which lycoris the strumpet , the paramour of gallus the poet did read , and the verses which corynna mentioned in ovid
dame venus , and as it were to give them circes cup to drink of , and so of men to make them beasts . what punishment deserve they as either make or print such unsavoury books ; truly i would wish
are these : first , it is lawful to read a play ; therefore to pen , to act , or see it acted . to this i answer first ; that the obscenity , ribaldry , amorousnesse , heathenishnesse , and
, being as true as it is ancient . when children youths and others , shall be trained up either in universities , schools , or play-houses , to play effeminate amorous wanton strumpets parts ; to act the parts of wooers
consider . secondly , as it is unlawful to act plays for profit , so likewise for pleasure sake , because this life is no life of carnal joy and jollity , but of weeping and mourning for our own and other
pagan idols and idolaters : it was originally devoted to idolatry , to bacchus , and heathen devil - gods : it tends only to dissoluteness and profaneness , to nourish idleness , vice , and all kind of wickedness both in
the first . i say it is altogether unlawful for any to act plays for gain or profit sake , or to make a trade or living of it . first , because the profession of a player is no lawful warantable
their skins or likeness . it was gods heavy judgment upon king nebuchadnezar , that he was driven from men , and did eat grass as oxen , and that his body was wet with the dew of heaven , till his
disguisednesse of threatricall attires , it is most apparent : for do not all actors , mummers , masquers u_ually put on the vizards , shapes and habits of iupiter , mars , apollo , mercury , bacchus , vulcan , saturne
, and aquinas : because it is directly contrary to the decency and virility of nature , and likewise to this text of deuteronomy ; nec pertinet ad honestatem viri vest muliebri indui : utrique enim sexui diversa indumenta natura dedit .
angelus de clavasio , because it is contrary to this text of deuteronomy. 22 .5. and inconvenient for the persons who put it on : and by alexander alensis , and aquinas : because it is directly contrary to the decency and
22 .5. the reason why it is a mortal sin is rendered by angelus de clavasio , because it is contrary to this text of deuteronomy. 22 .5. and inconvenient for the persons who put it on : and by alexander alensis
in patriâ experiri : for it is far better for a man to be slain , then to undergo so great an ignominy and shame in his own country . the wearing of womans apparel , even for a little space in
in sexum utrumque pollutus . it is storied of ortyges the tyrant of erythre and his companions , qui legibus solutis res administrabant civitatis ; that they grew to that height of effeminacy : quod per hyemem muliebribus calceis induti ambulabant ,
unto god himself , since it was an abomination even among heathen men : witness , not only the forequoted examples of heliogabalus , sardanapalus , nero , sporus , caius caligula , and others : together with commodus and annarus the
too oft they are ) it is only to deride and jeer them , for that which most commends them to god and all good men . the parts and persons therefore of stage - plays being such , the represention of
in it . thirdly , it is altogether infamous , yea unlawful , for any clergy - men whatsoever or their children , and for any who intend to enter into orders , either voluntarily or compulsorily , for reward or without
their forequoted passages witness , it was an infamous thing for senators , knights , for men or women of quality , or their children , to dance either in a public theatre , or at any private feasts : hence seneca
, accordingly . secondly as it is absurd & most infamous for princes , so also is it for any magistrates , nobles , gentlemen , or persons of rank or quality , to act a part in public or private on
scena tragica non vidi . it is recorded to the shame of vitellius ; vitellio cogniti scurrae quibus ille amicitiarum dehonestamentis mire gaudebat . quantoque magis appropinquabat vrbi , tanto corruptius iter , mixtis histrionibus & spadonum gregibus , et caetero neronianae
into the common iakes . it is registered among other of heliogabalus his lewd effeminate unworthy actions quod agebat domi fabulam paridis , ipse veneris personam subiens , ita vt subito vestes ad pedes defluerent , nudusque una manu ad mammam ,
much more of christians . it is storied of antoninus the emperor to his deserved infamy ; quod è syriae profectus , statim debacchari supra modum caepit , cultum patrij numinis , cui dicatus fuerat , celebrare supernacuis saltationibus , vestitum vsurpans
, how disgraceful a thing it is , for kings or emperors to turn actors , masquers , or gladiators on a stage , even in the very judgement of heathens , much more of christians . it is storied of antoninus
what an ignoble shameful thing it is for any prince or emperor to sing , to dance , or act upon a stage . hence aelius lampridius , and eutropius in their commodus antoninus , and herodian historiae l. 1 . &
plays , turning night as it were into day ; but likewise by a public edict to compel all the people to be present at his interludes at his unseasonable hours , and to chop off the heads of such as either
vile and execrable only when it is practised for lucre sake , but likewise the voluntary personating of them too for recreation or entertainment , especially in persons of rank and quality . to instance in some particulars . first , it
as they ) when as it was altogether unlawful for any ingenuous roman to be scourged act . 16.37 , 38 . & 22.24 . to 30 . by all which testimonies together with that passage of tully concerning roscius the eminent
give over now , because it is not only a kind of sacrilege , but even an high indignity and affront to god himself , to hate , to slander , persecute or wrong his servants , especially for controlling us in
more at bethel , for it was the kings chapel , and the kings court , where he would have no faithful prophets , no truth - telling sin - rebuking c_aplaines come who knew not how to flatter . did not
wherein it was written ; it is reported among the heathen , and gashmu saith it , that thou and the iewes think to rebel , for which cause thou buildest the wall , that thou may be their king ? &c.
in his hand , wherein it was written ; it is reported among the heathen , and gashmu saith it , that thou and the iewes think to rebel , for which cause thou buildest the wall , that thou may be
judge themselves for it ; it is their greatest grief and shame , and they go mourning for it all their days , loathing and abhorring themselves because they have thus offended . fourthly , they become more vigilant against their sins
holiness wherein they excel . it was a true speech of an heathen orator : an non hoc ita fit in omni populo ? nonne omnem exuperantiam virtutis oderunt ? quid ? aristides nonne ob eam ipsam causam patria pulsus est quod
branded for a puritan : it is not therefore men's hypocrisy , but their profession of religion that makes them puritans : which if it be but merely counterfeit , why do not our antipuritans make that profession of religion in truth
and precisians now , as it was then of christians ? hence also was the complaint of holy st. augustine . insultatur la quia christianus est : insultatur etiam la qui inter multos christianos melius vivit , et timens aspera verba insultatorum
occasion against him , except it were concerning the law of his god , and that he made prayers and supplications before the lord his god three times a day : and for this his piety only they procured him to be
they are christened , as it were , with these two proverbs or reproach , and pointed at for puritans and precisians , as if they were now unworthy for to live because they are thus converted to the lord . before
cannot but inform him . it is manifest then by all these particular experimental instances ; that those whom the world stiles puritans and precisians , are the very best and holiest christians , and that they are thus ignominiously entitled ,
more among us , as it is very like if stage - plays still continue , i am afraid these o_jectors will grow to that excess of wickedness ere lunge that the devil himself , ( nay , beelzebub the very prince
since the very naming of it is a sufficient refutation . i come therefore to the second clause : that many learn as much good at plays , as at sermons . and i believe it too ; for had they ever
and life it self ? it is all one as if they had said ; bawdry , heathenry , paganism , scurrilitie and divelry it self is equal with gods word : or that satan is equipollent with the lord . god
hearts of the spectators . it is a true saying of judicious augustine , that evil things elegantly expressed are most pernicious : whence lactantius affirms ; that the heathen philosophers , orators and poets were most hurtful in this , that
the more greedily and insensibly it is swallowed down . so the more witty , the more eloquent and rhetorical the plays , the more imperceptibly , the more perniciously & abundantly diffuse they their vices , their obscenities , & poysonful
known what it was , it was from their father the devil , and idolatrous pagans : and that which had so bad a beginning , will hardly contract any real goodness by any effluxe of time . thirdly , though they
their original is known what it was , it was from their father the devil , and idolatrous pagans : and that which had so bad a beginning , will hardly contract any real goodness by any effluxe of time . thirdly
invention : and by this it was manifested how he had drunk . and as prayer began , so it likewise concluded their feasts ; after which every one departed , not into the routs of roaring swashbucklers , nor _et into
that so they might as it were assault and besiege god with their united prayers : after that they did feed their faith , erect their hope , settle their confidence , inculcate their discipline with the scriptures and holy conferences ,
anno doom . 1270 . it was the custom of the english to spend their christmas time in plays , in masques , in most magnificent and pompous spectacles , and to addict themselves to pleasures , dancing , dicing , and
the holiness of god . it is evident then by all these premises , that our riotous , ludicrous & voluptuous christmasses , ( together with stage - plays , dancing , masques and such like pagan sports ) had their original
of play-houses is profane , it is less evil ( if it were tolerable ) that profane things only should be acted , and that holy things be handled only in a holy manner &c. but now that a theatre , a
the church of christ , it is most apparent , not only by those councels and authors which cry out against them , for their strange unparalleled excesses in all these kinds ; and by that elegant oration of king edgar to
such solemn christian festivalls ; it is so diametrally opposite unto truth , above 40 several councels , besides fathers and other christian writers professedly contradicting it , ( see act . 6 . scene 12 . & act . 7 .
idle surmise as true as it is fabulous , it then administers a pregnant argument against all common stage - plays : for if stage - plays be meet ornaments for princes palaces at times of greatest state and royallest entertainment ,
be cast out , &c. it is therefore no less then madness , then extremest folly in st. chrysostomes judgement , to honour , to court kings or great ones with plays or common actors : and a far greater frenzy is
of the best christians ? it was the brand , the infamy of the jewish nation ; that they were mingled among the heathen , and learned their works : and shall it not be much more ignoble and sinful for us
from age to age . it is therefore a great dishonour , a shame , if not a sin for christians ( who should follow the footsteps of their blessed saviour only , and those who walk as he hath walked ;
ethnickes in unprofitable things . it is an argument therefore of exciting virtue , not a permission or liberty of beholding the gentiles error ; that by this the mind may be more inflamed to evangelicall virtue by divine rewards , when
repose . but admit , it were an allusion to a play - house theatre , yet as thieves can never justify their stealing , nor u_urers their usury to be lawful , because the scripture saith , that christ , that
frequent in men's practise ; it were far more commodious , less dangerous , less pernicious , that those unparalleled forgotten villainies , whose memory is revived on the stage , were for ever drowned in oblivion , then re - imprinted
a greater ; yea , it is in truth nought else , but to make vice a balm , an antidote against it self ; and to make ill men good again , with that self-same thing which made them evil at
not in our theaters : it is then a sacrilege , ye , a madness , to relinquish god , his church , his word , his ordinances , his saints ( the only fountains of true virtue ) as too many
do it ? o no: it is the prerogative royal of the king of heaven , to teach men virtue ; and that not by stage - plays , or lascivious poems , but by his word and spirit only , which
but to hell ? doubtless it is but a very heathenish , graceless , divellish practise ; yea , a very shame and blemish to religion thus to do ; as if christs own example , the examples of his saints ,
, less then christians . it is all one , as for an expert artificer to lay aside his skill , to imitate a bungler : or for a school-master to give over teaching , and to subject himself to the tutorship
wherein christs spirit dwells . it is the pr_perty of all true virtue , to conquer , to expel all vice ; not to cohabit with it , or submit unto it : so that there can be no true vir_ue seated
adamant into brinish tears ? it was david_ religious protestation , i will set no wicked thing before mine eyes , i will not know a wicked person : and shall we who ought to follow davids steps in this his pious
pass for pious christians ? it was davids importunate prayer unto god ; turn away my eyes from beholding vanity ( which the fathers generally apply to stage - plays ) and quicken me in thy way : and can we ,
this most sacred precept ? it is the apostles peremptory command : but fornication and all uncleanness , and filthiness and foolish talking , let it not be once named among you as becomes saints : and can we then practise or
in good earnest : as it was wittily , and truly said of nonresidents , and plurality ministers , who put over their flock to hirelings : that he who feeds his flock by curate , shall perchance , go to heaven
, or merriment : since it is more tolerable , less heinous , to sin in earnest upon some pretended necessity , though no necessity can once authorize or force vs for to _inne , ) then thus to sin in jest
. it is dangerous , it is sinful therefore to applaud such plays , admit such poems , which may withdraw vs christians from our god , to gross idolatry , as they have oft seduced others , as able , as
love , and service . it is dangerous , it is sinful therefore to applaud such plays , admit such poems , which may withdraw vs christians from our god , to gross idolatry , as they have oft seduced others ,
hath long since abolished : it is the unanimous resolution of sundry fathers : that these comical , tragical , and theatricall poems , wherein the genealogies , marriages , births , ceremonies , histories , and lascivious actions of heathen gods
and perish in oblivion : it is the will , and pleasure of god : that the names of the wicked should rot : that the memories , relics , ceremonies , names , and monuments of idol - gods , should
of heathen idoles , unless it were with detestation , and dislike . god forbid ( saith saint hierome ) that omnipotent jove , o my hercules , my castor , or other such monsters rather then gods , should ever _ound
day rue it , when it is too late , if they now repent it not in time . 
and reject them too . it was the branded infamy of the iewes , that they pleased not god , and were contrary to all men : and will it not be ours too , if all these authorities will not sway
mustered up against them . it is not their long since conquered and confuted lodge or haywood ( two scribbling hackney players , their only professed printed play - champions that i know of , ) who can withstand their all -
as diligently executed , as it was piously enacted , it would suppress many great abuses ( both within the letter and intent , which is very large ) that are yet continuing among us to gods dishonour , and good christians
, how ignominious a thing it was reputed among the ancient romans , for men or women of quality to masque or dance in public or to act a masque or play upon a stage . see p. 696 , 697 ,
devotion of their lives . it was one great part of their discipline , to censure ; one badge of their christianity , their piety , to abandon stage - plays , players and play - haunters ; let it be one
a province of cappadocia , it is somewhat probable by the testimony of strabo , no infamous cappadocian : of aenea_ sylvi_s , and volat_r_nus , who inform us : that cappadocia was divided by the persians into two kingdoms , viz:
upon his own knowledge . it is but , in fulloni_ , in fullio , or infulio ( no man knows which ) @ vt f_re_atv_ , apud epiphaniam cilici_ oppidum : and shall we believe a ferebatvr , a mere uncertain
be litterall ) ; yet it is never so , when as it is spoken of any native cappadocian , where it may have a proper litterall construction : which is the case of george the arrian , whom all writers hitherto
cappadocian borne . thirdly , it is evident by the unavoidable suffrage of gregory nazianzen , the country - man , if not the coaetanian of this arrian george : who in his oration 31 . in laudem athanasij , writes thus
their licence , ( because it is an apparent evidence of their lewdness , and a means to make them common prostituted whores , few else resorting unto plays but such ; ) is an impregnable evidence of the lewdness , the
shows how execrable a thing it is , for clergy men especially , to resort to stageplayes . to this worthy constitution or law of his , i shall annexe two others , worthy our observation . virnullo modouxorem expellat , nisi
therefore contemplating these things , it is told us , beyond the common truth of things , that certain of the most reverend deacons and presbyters , ( for wee are more ashamed to say , that even bishops who are best
habeant vestes inordina_as ōnino prohibetur it is wholly prohibited clergy men , tha_ they keep no checker - men , or tables and dice in their ho_ses . all clergy men are _tterly prohibited to play a_ dice , to be present
at other times , yet it were unseasonable to practise thē on lords day nights : for this were but to begin in the spirit , and end in the flesh ; to conclude holy days & duties with profane exercises ;
at morning or midnight , it is the direct and punctual verdict of dionysius alexandrinus epist . 1 . bibl. patrum tom . 3 . p. 81. a. to h. of theophilus antiochenus comment . in evangelia , l. 1 . bib.
saturday nights . lastly , it is infallibly evident by the constant practise of the primitive church , who kept the lords day only frō evening to evening , not from morning to morning ; as is evidenced ( not only by
him that sent me whiles it is called to day : the night comes when no man can work : therefore it is most consonant to reason and nature that it should begin at evening . thirdly , this beginning of the
a day of rest , it is most natural and proper it should then begin when as god and man begin their rest ; and leave off their labour ; not when as they begin their work : but god began his
any ecclesiastical writers ; ) it is most apparent : first , because we read of no other beginning or end of the sabbath in scripture but this : and to make it begin from the very hour or minute of our
and since his resurrection on it was the cause why christians subsequently observed the whole day , not the very minute or hour on which he rose , or that part only of the day which remained after he was risen ;
two beginnings , and so it was begun before it began , and after it began , which is a contradiction : ) and if it altered not the beginning of the first day , then by what authority is it changed
the day began ( as it is certain he did , by several scriptures , ) then his resurrection did not change the beginning of the day , it being begun befo_e : ( else this day should have two beginnings ,
bishops and proxies , ) it is most apparent , ( to pass by dicing , carding , dancing , health - drinking , bonfires , new-years gifts , scurrilous songs , and other recited particulars concerning clergy men , which they
on these days , as it is said , let plays , dances , drunkēnes , vain discourses , and what ever may offend gods majesty , cease &c. we reject those fraternities which are for the most part made for rioting
, as wee hope , it is cast out of our dioces . part 5 . cap. 6 . finally let parish priests be far from all luxury : for paul will have a parish priest to be sober , not given
cap. 25 , 26 . it is lawful for a priest to live of the altar , but to be riotous is not permitted . therefore a general council recalls all clergy men from surfeiting and drunkenness , & from drinking of
thence . can : 100. it is provided for clergy men by the law of the fathers , that being secluded from a vulgar life , they withdraw themselves from worldly pleasures . they may not be present at stage - plays
glory of god , &c. it is necessary therefore for every man to eat that he may live ; and those who live a married life , and have children , and are of a lay - condition , for them to
book of the kings , it is thus written , and manasses built an altar to all the host of heaven , in the two courts of the lords house , and made his children to pass through the fire , &c.
. can . 73 . it is not lawful to keep the wicked observations of kalends , nor to observe the festivals of the gentiles ; nor yet to begirt or adorn houses with laurel or greene _oughes : for all this
. can . 59 . it is not lawful for ministers or clergy men to behold any stage - plays at marriages or feasts , but they ought to rise and return from thence before the stage - plays enter . can
. can . 40 . it is not lawful for an elder to sing or dance at feasts . the fifteenth , is , capitula graecarum synodorum , collected by martin bishop of bracara , anno doom : 610 . in which
in the church : for it is written , my house shall be called an house of prayer . can . 40 . it is not lawful for an elder to sing or dance at feasts . the fifteenth , is ,
. can . 9 . it is not lawful for quires of secular men or girls , to sing songs , or provide banquets in the church : for it is written , my house shall be called an house of prayer
. can : 1 . it is not lawful in the kalends of january to make any bonfires or filthy plays ; or to observe any diabolical new-years gifts : but let all offices be so performed on this day , as
out of all spain , it is committed to the care of the ministers and judges by this sacred council . which canon was ratified by the public edict of king reccaredus , who punished the breach of it in rich men
affection of love , as it were to be glad of his brothers death , even there where as sorrow and mourning with doleful sounds ought to be heard for the loss of a dear brother , &c. therefore such foolish mirth
all made public renunciations ; it was the custom of the french church , for christians particularly to renounce all stageplayes , as salvian testifies : and under the pomps of the devil , which it was then ( and now )
this ancient council affirms ; it is cer_aine , the primitive church and christians did evermore condemn them : and can we yet approve , applaud , frequent them now ? eighthly , st. chrysostome , about 400 years after christ ,
conscience to maintain , though it were with the hazard of their lives . fifthly , philo , a very learned jew , who flourished in the apostles times , under caius the emperor , ( a man whom iosephus , eusebius
rejected stage - plays , it is most apparent by these ensuing reasons . first , because we find no mention at all of any such plays or interludes in any canonical scripture , or ancient jewish authors , nor any intimation
of stage - plays . it is evident then by all these canonical and apochryphal scriptures , & by the apostles constitutions ; that stage - plays are directly contrary to , and condemned by the very sacred _aw and word of
in all things : for it is not a light thing to do wickedly against the law of god : which apochryphall passage , the papists allowing to be canonical scripture , and protestants approving to be an undoubted story , though
labour to avoid , though it were with the loss of his very dearest members , much more of his unprofitable and sinful pleasures , which always end in grief . our saviour christ himself hath given us this advice , that
christians . damnation , as it is a fru_t of sin , so it is that which every man should labour to avoid , though it were with the loss of his very dearest members , much more of his unprofitable and
not true . since therefore it is evident by the confession of all these fathers , counsels and christian writers , who have censured stage - plays : by excommunicating players and play - haunters in the primitive church till their sincere
the fashion and deceit of it is passed away , &c. depart therefore into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels . and then alas poor wretches , what will become of theme when as christ sha_l thus upbraide and
the enemies weapons ; and it is an impossible deliverance to be compassed about with flames , and not to burn . wherefore let not a peradventure , that we may escape gods judgements , though we still resort to stage -
the fomentations of sin . it is an uncertain victory to fight amidest the enemies weapons ; and it is an impossible deliverance to be compassed about with flames , and not to burn . wherefore let not a peradventure , that
of them being led as it were by the hand unto the truth by the disease that was then upon them ; others of them embracing the faith of christ , as a defensative to secure them from the plague ; their
him . sure i am it was a just judgement of god , to teach kings and great men , and not to be actors or spectators of vanity , but wholly to lay aside such foolish masques and interludes . at
, with divers others . it is storied by froyssart in his chronicle , and by some others since , that in the reign of charles the sixth , in the year of our lord ; 1392 . at a marriage made
taken away , for surely it is to be feared , besides the destruction of body and soul that many are brought unto by frequenting the theater and curtin_ that one day these places will likewise be cast down by god himself
, as soon as ever it was borne , began to dance up and down , being shaped as men use to paint the devil . lo the justice of god upon this person , that he who acted the devils part
these ensuing examples evidence . it is storied of aeschylus , ( the first inventor of tragedies , as horace , quintilian , tertullian , and others write : ) that his brains were dashed out with the fall of a torteis
breathing out malice , fury , anger , murder , cruelty , tyranny , treachery , frenzy , treason , and revenge , ( the constant theames , and chief
service are derided ? undoubtedly it is . never is there greater atheism , or more open desperate profaneness , more notorious contempt of god , his word , his worship , his fear , his service , then in such places
others to them ; whereas it were far better for such men not to have been borne , then to be thus enrolled among the number of those , who are borne for the public hurt of others . seventhly , that
the sight what - ever it were , he opened his eyes ; and forth - with he was smitten with a more grievous wound in his soul , then he whom he desired to see was in his body , and
, and withal being as it were prepared to contemn and overcome the sight what - ever it were , he opened his eyes ; and forth - with he was smitten with a more grievous wound in his soul , then
whiles they love them . it is storied of carinus the most defiled of men ; that when he came to the empire he abandoned all his best friends , retaining and choosing none but the very worst of all for his
and fantastic folly ? undoubtedly it is . wherefore i shall briefly conclude this scene with this 40 . play - oppugning syllogisme . that which effeminates men's minds , men's manners , and makes them womanish both in their minds ,
it detestable . certainly if it were not meet for an eminent apostle to dwell near to plays or play-houses , for fear their lewd vicinity should make his habitation detestable to christian auditors who resorted to it : much more unseemely
makes it his recreation when it is acted by others ? how can he renounce , abhor , condemn it at home ; who thus applauds , affects , admires it abroad ? certainly , he can never make sin his greatest
to stage - plays . it was the use of players and play - haunting pagans in the primitive church , as soon as ever they were converted to the christian faith ; to renounce and utterly abandon stage - plays ;
saints , his ordin_nces ? it is not from their late extraordinary resort to plays and play-houses , which is now more frequent then in former times ? for my own part i can impute it originally to nought else but it
the sabbath profaned , &c. it was ordained in rome by the emperor trajan , that the romanes should observe but 22 holy - days thorowout the whole year . for he thought without doubt , that the gods were more served
converted to the use wherefore it was ordained , may be said to be lost . for to this end was man borne , and had the benefit of time given him , that he might honour , serve , and love
honester , how much better it were to observe no holy - days , then to keep them in this manner ? whose heart is so estranged from reason , so devious from the truth through perverse error , that he may
days and lords - days it is lawful for maids in a public manner to run abroad to their lovers , yea to their panders , which promised liberty they diligently study to preserve without control , and speedily as soon as
for the people . truly it is injuriously and evil spoken against the glory of god and the salvation of the people . but se__ng they will not be in the whole as good unto god as before they have been unto
thereof . the lack of it is the cause of sedition and trouble , as salomon saith ; where prophecy wants , the people are dissipated . wherefore i cannot a little wonder at the opinion and doctrine of such , as
own idol - temples . it is not possible therefore for any christian to feed his eyes , his ears with these diabolical banqvets , and yet worthily to participate of christs body and blood , the spiritual sweet - meates of
holy duties . secondly , it is impossible for any man to serve two different masters both together , to serve god and mammon , christ and the devil : god in the church , the devil in the play - house
ye shall laugh . but it is not enough for us to laugh and be merry , unless we rejoice with sin and madness , unless our laughter be tempered with filthiness , and mixed with impiety . what error i say
continually commit , do as it were appugne heaven with a common consent . to christ therefore , o monstrous madness ! even to christ do we offer cirques and stage - plays ; yea and even then especially when as we
mad endeavours , and as it were to have marched forwards against the clouds ? so we through the injuries which all the world over we continually commit , do as it were appugne heaven with a common consent . to christ
the heart feigned , as it were fitted for god ? what east thou to do with the pomps of the devil , who profess thy self a lover of christ ? do not deceive thy self , for god hates such
two or three instances . it is storied by suetonius in the life of nero ; that he put down chariot - plays and stage - plays , in which men by an inveterate liberty did use to cheat and steal in
was but a play , it was all in sport , nothing in earnest : which answer solon hearing , stroke his staff upon the ground with indignation , making this reply : if we commend or approve this play of yours
goods of their friends if it were for their good : this school-master likewise exercised his schollers to practise these instructions in jest among themselves : by which means it came to pass , that some of his schollers who had a
to deceive their friends if it were for their good ; and to steal the goods of their friends if it were for their good : this school-master likewise exercised his schollers to practise these instructions in jest among themselves : by
amorous , and obscene ; it is as evident , as the morning sun : first , by the express , and punctual testimony of sundry fathers . read but tatianus oration . aduersus graecos . theophylus antiochenus contra autolicum . lib.
, as becomes saints : it is a great solecisme , yea , a sin among christians , either to relate , or do , ( much more , to personate , pen , or pleasingly to behold , ) any obscene
riotous feasts , ( as it is now the usage of too many christians ) to exhilarate themselves with stage - plays , of purpose to draw men on to drunkenness , luxury , and more gross intemperance : whence the council
attendants of these sins . it was the custom of the pagan greekes and romanes , in all their drunken riotous feasts , ( as it is now the usage of too many christians ) to exhilarate themselves with stage - plays
be such . secondly , it is evident from the testimony , the experience of former ages ; who not only enumerate stage - plays among the excesses , the luxury both of the greckes and romanes , as the fathers and
matthew parker witnesses , ) it is most apparent . first , by their ordinary actors and frequenters ; who are commonly such idle drones , as live either altogether without any honest calling ; their whole life being but an apprenticeship
them from such punishments . it is most apparently evident then by all these promises ; that not only pagan writers , emperors , states , and magistrates ; together with the primitive christians , fathers , and christian writers of foreign
c. 3 . and thereupon it is severely condemned under great mulcts and punishments ; the dice - players being to forfeit ten pound a piece , and to suffer two years imprisonment , and such as keep any dicing - houses
of prison . and also it is ordained and enacted by the said authority , that if any person or persons sell or keep any visours or visor in his house , or in any other place within this realm af_er the
so powerful and reigning as it is . this memorable act of suppressing play-houses by our london magistrates , by authority from our virtuous queen elizabeth , and her most sage privy counsel , as intolerable grievances and annoyances to our chief
o_t plays , in christians it is a presumptuous sin ; because we see better ways and yet take the worse : we know their corruptions and allow them . all this hath been sufficiently proved by ancient writers , and daily
impudency to defend them : it is sin in the gentiles to set o_t plays , in christians it is a presumptuous sin ; because we see better ways and yet take the worse : we know their corruptions and allow them
these our writers do , it is evident , not only by our own daily experience ; ( there being not one godly faithful minister where these play-houses , plays and players are admitted , but hath oft cyred out against them
excusing himself , said , it was but a play : no ( replied solon ) but this play turns to earnest . much more had he blamed comedies , which were then unknown : and now always they put at the
aristotle saith ; and therefore it is hid under the show of good , that it may deteine and deceive incautelous men : for by nature we are vehemently prone to honesty . but albeit some good things are mingled in these
all appearance of it . it is therefore a great sign of corrupt and perverted discipline , that these effeminate persons and furtherers of most _ishonest pleasures , are in great esteem both in the courts of princes & in rich cities
was standing , then when it was falling unto ruin : since in its ruin , only the stones and timber , but in the lives of play - haunters , all the monuments and ornaments not of walls , but of
ancest_rs , more filthy whiles it was standing , then when it was falling unto ruin : since in its ruin , only the stones and timber , but in the lives of play - haunters , all the monuments and ornaments
homines providi praecaverunt , &c. it is evident then by saint augustines resolution : that stage - plays incurably vitiate and desperately corrupt , if not subvert men's manners ; and so bring ruin to that state that suffers them , the
great scandal of christianity : it is storied of philip augustus , the 42 . king of france ; that he being an enemy to public dissolutions , and a friend to good order and justice , enacted public laws against players
was now declining , though it were with the hazard of their lives ; and not to suffer herod to proceed with these his spectacles , shutting up their city gates against them . which when herod perceived , he began to
writes he to lambert ) it is a greater offence to the gods , and more damage to the common - weal for these truants to take away the wits from the wise folk , then for murderers to take away men's
all christian princes imitation : it is not for the majesty of a grave and virtuous prince that in his presence any such vain thing should be showed ; for in such a case himself should be no less noted of lightness
: but they are as it were by force thrust into sincere and pure minds , by examples , by voice , by hand and action : so that i verily believe , there were never any inventors and actors of plays
we cannot possibly escape . it is marvelous to consider how the gesturing of a player , which tully terms , the eloquence of the body , is of force to move , and prepare a man to that which is ill
as we do . for it is no means to acquit us before god , to say that others be no better then our selves . i would rather wish that the evil conversation of others might be an occasion to draw
more impudent of life . it is not enough for us to excuse our selves by the doings of other men ; it will not be taken for an excuse , although we could allege ; that every man doth as we
from such wicked assembl__s_ for it is always wisdom to shun the occasions of evil . youth will be withdrawn by company , if they be not restrained of their liberty . they need not seek out for school-masters , they can
many . the servants as it is manifestly to be proved , have consented to rob their maste_s to supply the want of their harlots : there is the practising of married wi_es to train them from their husbands , and places
as the cause requires . it were ill painting the devil like an angel ; he must be portrayed as he is , that he may the better be known , sin hath always a fair cloak to cover his filthy body
is an evil blindness , it is a disease of the eyes , not of the body only , but first of the soul : therefore he stops the re_me of uncleanesse from thence by the fear of the law . wherefore
the pulling down . truly it is a part of great uncleanesse both for young men and old men to hasten to the play - house . but would to god the evil did extend no further . for this perchance seems
so from hence : for it is lawful for thee with much con_idence to repeat all things at home , prophetical speeches , apostolical precepts , divine laws ; to furnish or set to every table of virtue , and to make
he abound in wealth . it is lawful for thee to reprove and correct them for the glory of god . but how is it lawful to chide for god ? if thou shalt see a drunkard , or a thief ,
would consider it ) yet it is altogether unworthy of our religion , if you suffer even others for to do them , whether they be your servants , your friends , or your neighbours . whom god doth hate , do
copulations ? all will say it is a grievous and unworthy act : yea they seem verily to punish likewise this heinous offence . why then dost thou bring in those cynaedi , & exolete persons ? neither dost thou only bring
his newness of life . it is fit a believer should shine forth , not only by those things which he hath received from god . but also by those things which he himself performs , and to be manifested on all
doth vex the mind , it is presently extinguished . and not only the voice and face of a woman , but the apparel doth much more trouble the spectators ; so that if any more rude or abject poor man beholds
very time , when as it is thundered out unto thee with a loud voice , that thee shouldest fly from these things , neither dost thou tremble , nor sta_d amazed . but these things thou hast learned ( i pray
for thou came hither as it were simply and perfunctorily : but thou rushe_ thither daily with all earnestness of mind , with speed , with alacrity : which appears by this ; because that most filthy sin , which by your
as thou art always as it were made drank with these ridiculous spectacles ? for that thou came hither now , i wonder not ; yea verily i wonder greatly . for thou came hither as it were simply and perfunctorily :
should but speak of , it were just for thee to cudgle them . answer i pray , what satisfaction can thou give , who behold these things with great delight which are not lawful to be named ? and preferrest those
thy own self ? for it were much better to keep silence , then to utter such obscene things , which if thy servants should but speak of , it were just for thee to cudgle them . answer i pray ,
, and do not as it were blame my more troublesome speech . for i prohibit not marriages , nor honest pleasure ; but i would have it to be done with honesty , not with obscenity or sin . i do
her in his heart : it is not only spoken to a monk , but likewise to an husband . for that mountain in which christ taught these things was then filled almost only with such . consider therefore that theater ,
death , yet to us it is made a cause of life . but thou leave the fountain of his blood , and this dreadful cup , and run hastily to that diabolical well that thou may behold a swimming whore ,
of extreme folly ; and it is better for one to besmear his whole face with clay and dirt , then with a spectacle of so great filthiness . for dirt is not so noxious to the eyes , as that unchaste
is thus uncovered ; because it is nature it self , and there is the same body of an whore , and of a free woman . for if thou think that there is no obscenity in such a fight , for
before the fight . wherefore it is not our parts to laugh continually , to let our selves loose to cachinnations and derisions , to effeminate our selves with delight , but rather of those men and women actors who are beheld
, and powers ; and it is well with us , if giving all diligence , and watching with all , we may be able to endure their fierce assaults . but if we laugh and play , fostering with all perpetual
from the devil . for it is gods use to give an humbled , trembling , broken , chaste , penitent , and wounded soul . these verily are the gifts of god , because we likewise stand most in nee_ of
sharper and greater . for it is not so heinous a thing to offend , as after an offence to be ashamed of the remedy , and not to obey the ministers who enjoin such things . but what so great wickedness
stage - plays ; because it is a ready way to make her an adulteress , if not a probable argument that she is such a one already , since she dares resort to such lewd suspicious places : ( which i
the world it self . it was the use of ancient times among the gre_kes and romans , after their plays were ended , for whores to prostitute themselves to the lusts of others , either on , or under the theaters
experience prove but true . it is too well known to divers stage - customers ; that the most notorious panders , bawds , and strumpets , ( the _a_e of many a youngsters body , soul , estate , credit :
plays , do it . it is storied of tiberius , ( a monster of more then beastly obscenity , ) that as he adorned his houses with lascivi_us pictures , the better to excite his l_sts ; ( a practice much
whoredom , and unclenesse ; it is most apparently evident : first , from their subject matter : which being for the most part amorous , scurrilous , or obscene , consisting of adulteries , rapes , incests , whoredoms , love
deliver you . since then it is evident by all these premises to the hearts , the consciences of all men , that adultery , fornication , uncleanesse , are such abominable , capital , deep - dyed pernicious sins ; those
, among the lacedaemonians , it was lawful for a man to kill him , who was taken in adultery with his wife . hence the corinthians used to drown those who prostituted themselves to the lust of others . the vestel
the play-houses at london , it is the fashion of youths to go first into the yard , and to carry their eye thorough every gallery , then like unto ravens , where they spy the carrion thither they fly , and
in rome . in rome it was the fashion of wanton young men , to place themselves as nigh as they could to the courtesans , to present them pom - granates , to play with their garments , and waite on
been as free , as it is for your money in the royal exchange , to take a short stock or a long ; a faling band , or a french ruff . the first building of theaters was to ravish the
bow and arrows , because it is the property of lust to wound alo_ffe , which being well weighed ; saint cyprian had very good cause to complain ; that players are spots to our manners , nourishers of vice , and
, that dances are as it were acc_ssaries , or dependants , or things annexed unto whoredom : where also by the way is proved ; that plays are joined and k_it together in a rank with them . the second and
and so he proceeds . it is therefore abundantly evident by the concurrent punctual testimonies of these 30 . fathers , whose words i have here transcribed ; to whom i might have added , clemens romanus , irenaeus , epiphanius ,
honest modest mirth ; but it is an ignominious thing , for gravity to be often recreated with such wantonness . from these spectacles therefore , but especially from obscene ones , the eye of an honest man is to be kept
ears to these things ? it is verily a pleasant thing , and not dishonest , for an honest man to be sometimes delighted with honest modest mirth ; but it is an ignominious thing , for gravity to be often recreated
in which little ones as it were playing , and exhibiting a great sacrament , as i have said , both the repr_bate iewes are demonstrated in esau , and the predestined christians appear in iacob . for that iacob one little
like a most beautiful flower it is quickly blasted with a small wind , and corrupted with an easy breath : especially where both age consents to vice , and the authority of an husband is wanting , whose shadow is the
thus is adultery learned whiles it is beheld , and the evil of public authority playing the pander to these vices , she who at first came perchance a chaste matron to the play , returns a strumpet from the play -
with grief and shame . it is a tragedians part , to rela_e ancient wickednesses in verse : the ancient horror of paricides and incestuou_ persons is represented by him to the life ; lest those wickednesses which were committed in former
what will it do when it is presented with unchaste examples both of body and nature ? she who thus falls of her own accord , what will she do if she be precipitated ? the mind therefore is wholly to be
faithfvll christians , yea , it is altogether vnlavvfvll for them to be present at these plays . these so vain , so pernicious , so sachrilegious stage - plays , as i have now often affirmed , are vvholly to be
well good reader , ) it is not lavvfvll for faithfvll christians , yea , it is altogether vnlavvfvll for them to be present at these plays . these so vain , so pernicious , so sachrilegious stage - plays , as
unchaste words and motions ? it is not our part _o pass sentence upon such , for they themselves may perceive and see what part they have chosen to themselves . thou therefore who hear these things . be ye holy ,
away . and of truth it is a just sentence of the gods , that such as have taken vain pleasure together , when they are departed to weep for their losses . thus he . the poet i_venal reports ; that
wife and miserable children , it is here drawn out and cast away ; and he and his sit all this eminent feast , hungry , and indigent of all things . men now make havoc of their goods , and prodigally
a little popular applause ? it is ( quoth arnobius ) an inexpiable sin , that gifts and stipends are allowed and appointed unto stage - players , and worn - out pantomimes , the deriders of the gods ; that they
lost , and cast as it were into the dirt ; yet nothing so much can be now consumed , because there is not much to spend . and yet such is our unsatiable desire of most filthy pleasure , that verily
upon plays and theaters . it is recorded of divers roman emperors , ( as caligula , claudius , nero , verus , maximinus , balbinus , carinus , and others ) who are therefore censured by their own historians ; that
much precious time , &c. it is most apparent , if we will but sum up all those days , those hours which are vainly spent in the composing , conning , practising , acting , beholding of every public , or
such laughter and applauses , it is most apparent . first , by experience , which infallibly informs men , that stage - plays have evermore superabounded with obstreperous wanton cachinnations , acclamations , applauses , misbeseeming modest persons , much more
in the university of athens it was unlawful for any to laugh , especially in a profuse ridiculous immodest fashion . the very heathens then as is evident by these and sundry other testimonies , condemned loud excessive laughter . if such
. among the ancient persians it was utterly unlawful to laugh openly in a loud or dissolute manner . and if aelian may be credited ; in the university of athens it was unlawful for any to laugh , especially in a
plays , is evil , it is most apparent . first , in regard of the original efficient cause of it , which is commonly some obscene , lascivious , sinful passage , gesture , speech , or jest , ( the
and foment their lusts ; it is more then evident ; not only by modern experience , ( our play-houses resounding always with such voluptuous melody ; ) but likewise by the suffrage of sundry paga_ and christian authors , both ancient
counter - point , as it were a kennel of dogs : others roar out a treble like a sort of bulls : _thers grunt out a base as it were a number of hogs ; so that a foul evil favoured
bellowe a tenor , as it were a company of oxen : others bark a counter - point , as it were a kennel of dogs : others roar out a treble like a sort of bulls : _thers grunt out a
the coristers ney descant as it were a sort of colts ; others bellowe a tenor , as it were a company of oxen : others bark a counter - point , as it were a kennel of dogs : others roar
service and common prayer , it is so chanted and minsed , and mangled , of our costly hired , curious , and nice musicians ( not to instruct the audience withal , nor to stir up men's minds unto devotion ,
&c. wherefore without doubt , it were better for religion to cast out of the churches such chattering and jangling _ayes , or else so to appoint them , that when they sing , they should rather rehearse the songs after the
of his voice , as it were to threaten silence , and now again to imitate the agonies of a dying man , or the ecstasies of such as suffer . in the mean time the whole body is stirred up and
to sing ; but as it were to breath out his last gasp , by shutting in his breath , and by a certain ridiculous interception of his voice , as it were to threaten silence , and now again to imitate
voice : now and then it is wrethed , and retorted with a certain artificial circumvolution . sometimes thou may see a man with an open mouth , not to sing ; but as it were to breath out his last gasp
vigour being laid aside , it is sharpened into the shrilnesse of a womans voice : now and then it is wrethed , and retorted with a certain artificial circumvolution . sometimes thou may see a man with an open mouth ,
a shame to speak , it is enforced into an horses neighings ; sometimes , the masculine vigour being laid aside , it is sharpened into the shrilnesse of a womans voice : now and then it is wrethed , and retorted
dashed , and then again it is enlarged with a louder sound . sometimes , which is a shame to speak , it is enforced into an horses neighings ; sometimes , the masculine vigour being laid aside , it is sharpened
is remitted , now again it is dashed , and then again it is enlarged with a louder sound . sometimes , which is a shame to speak , it is enforced into an horses neighings ; sometimes , the masculine vigour
voice is strained , anon it is remitted , now again it is dashed , and then again it is enlarged with a louder sound . sometimes , which is a shame to speak , it is enforced into an horses neighings
and cuts asunder , as it were , certain middle notes . one while the voice is strained , anon it is remitted , now again it is dashed , and then again it is enlarged with a louder sound . sometimes
and idol , fastened at it were to some high ; altar and a certain miserable woman , who by reason of the necessity of her servile condition , should apply her self to her distaff , is taught of thee ,
; let those whose office it is to sing in the church hear these things ; that we must sing to god with the heart , not with the voice ; neither after the manner of tragedians are the throat and chops
to the selfsame purpose . it is not unlawful , nor yet altogether unseemely for boys to sing ; but to sing with in_nimate instruments ; to sing with dancing and cymbals ; the use of which kind of instruments , with
for such songs do as it were cast dirt into the ears . what that barbarian threatened , saying ; you shall eat your own dung : that verily do many to you now , not in word , but in deed
i would those whose practise it is now , would mark his words ) do call in devils thither , so they who call in david with his harp ( he means his psalmes of which he speaks ) do call in
mixed effeminate amorous dancing ; it is most apparent ; not only by our own modern experience , but likewise by the copious testimony of sundry pagan and christian writers of all sorts : as namely , of polibius . historiae .
of season . since therefore it is infallibly evident by all these premises , that our theatricall amorous mixed lascivious dancing , is sinful and unchristian at the least , if not heathenish and diabolical ; the major of my precedent syllogisme
that hath no working time , it is equal he should have no dancing time . and yet how many are there now a-days who will needs entitle themselves to this time to dance , though they professedly disclaim all times to morn
- player , either as it were praising or correcting it . he did likewise dance ( saith he ) in the night sometimes : and upon a time , sending for three grave men who had been consuls , into his
cups and ebrious feasts . it is seneca his lamentable complaint of his times , and we may justly take up the same of ours , that the wits of slothful youth were grown lazy , neither were they industrious in the
objected ( saith he ) it is a reproach of a most vehement accuser : if falsely , of an ill - tongued rayler . for since thou art o so great auth_rity , thou ought not , o marcus cato ,
should tread in : so it is quite out of the road of christianity , and salvation . wee never read of any christians that went dancing into heaven ; though we read of sundry wicked ones who have gone dancing down
kind of dancing , as it was never in use among the p_imitiue christians , whose footsteps we should tread in : so it is quite out of the road of christianity , and salvation . wee never read of any christians
say they ) as now it is used , is an occasion of much wantonness , lewdness , and lasciviousness ; of much riot , epicurisme , effeminacy , voluptuousness ; of much prodigal expense , much loss of time , much
7 . commandment , because it is a common occasion both of actual and mental adultery ; as their fore-mentioned authorities at large declare , therefore it must needs be unlawful unto christians , among whom adultery , fornication and uncleanesse are
of instruments , and as it is said , if vanity did not commend vanity , there should be no sight more ridiculous , nor yet more out of order then dancing ; this is a liberty to wantonness , a friend
, how wicked a thing it is to dance . the first testimony we will produce , is that we read in the gospel , mark 6 . it pleased herod so well , that it cost john baptist his life .
showing that they are as it were accessories or appendaxis , or things annexed unto whoredom . thomas lovell , his dialogue between custom and verity , concer_ing the use and abuse of dancing , in verse . the church of evil
wickedness of the other . it is no good argument to say , adultery is worse then simple fornication : sodomy with such other unnatural wickednesses are far more abominable then adultery : therefore fornication and adultery are lawful and may still
our god . since then it is abundantly evident by all these premises , ( and i suppose by many players and play - haunters particular experience ) that men's putting on of womans apparel ( especially to act a whores ,
lord their god ; because it is an occasion off , a violent provocation to that monstrous unparalleled sin of sodomy , ( cuius defecit interpretatio erubuit ratio , conticuit oration : ) which the following chapter , with several other scriptures
properly called adultery , because it is unnatural . yea hence ( as some have truly observed ) those women who put on men's , and men who put on women's apparel , are said in this text , not only to
not christians or religion : it is a thing of ill , not good report ; a thing not honest , but vile and filthy in the sight of all men , as the fore - alleged authors , and act 5
an unnatural , so likewise it is an effeminate act to put on womans apparel , especially to play a womans part . this all the fore - quoted authors , together with act 5 . scene 3 . abundantly testify :
such . secondly , as it is an unnatural , so likewise it is an effeminate act to put on womans apparel , especially to play a womans part . this all the fore - quoted authors , together with act 5
with god and man . it is evident then by all these premises : that the putting on of womans apparel , and so è converso ; is an unnatural , and so a shameful , an abominable act : therefore to
shameless papists , bidding as it were professed defiance both to god , to nature , moses , and s. paul , have made this a solemn ceremony at the admission of all their nonnes into their unholy orders , to poll
in mans apparel , though it were under pre_ence of religion , as theodora ( who lived a penitentiary life in mans apparel for her adultery in a monastery for sundry years together ) is recorded to have done , and as
our viragoes do ) because it is given them as a natural covering to distinguish them from men : as the apostle plainly teaches , in the 1 cor . 11.5 , 6 , 15 . the 1 tim. 2.9. & deuteronomy.
woman have long hair , it is a glory to her , for her hair is given her for a covering . these are the things which thou may answer to those who inquire of thee . farewell . thus doth this
man have long hair , it is a shame unto him ? but if a woman have long hair , it is a glory to her , for her hair is given her for a covering . these are the things which
in the church : for it is not permitted to them to speak , but to be in subjection , as the law saith . but if they will learn any thing , they may ask their husbands at home . and
or women . for thus it is written , the apparel of the man shall not be put upon the woman , neither shall a man be arrayed in a womans garment ; because every one who shall do these things ,
being out of fashion ) it is a glory to her ; for her hair is given her for a covering : ) do copiously censure and condemn the frizzling , nourishing , and wearing of long effeminate hair , as an
which our ruffians glory ) it is a shame unto him ? but if a woman have long hair , ( of which our english ladies , who have cast off god and nature , shame and modesty , religion and subjection
she have long hair , it is a glory unto her , for her hair is given her for a covering . indeed i find some precedents of women , who have been peccant in this kind : as namely , some
10 .6 , 15 . it is a shame for a woman to be shaven or shorn : but if she have long hair , it is a glory unto her , for her hair is given her for a covering .
lord . fiftly , admit it were lawful for a man to put on womās apparel to save his life , or to avoid some imminent danger , as achilles , euclis , william bp . of ely , with some few
upon the stage as now it is common ) adds nothing to its lawfulness , it still continues an abomination to the lord . fiftly , admit it were lawful for a man to put on womās apparel to save his life
wearing womans apparel ( suppose it were as rare upon the stage as now it is common ) adds nothing to its lawfulness , it still continues an abomination to the lord . fiftly , admit it were lawful for a man
lawful upon no occasion . it is no justification , no excuse at all for a murderer , an adulterer , swearer , lier , thief , drunkard , or the like , to plead , that he commits these sins but
a womans garment , as it is a branch of the moral law , having a relation to the 7 . commandment , and to several scriptures in the new testament , concerning modesty and decency in apparel : as good divines
if the putting on of it were not unlawful , the frequent putting on of it , being the true use of it , could not be sinful , and so not abominable ; there being nothing odious unto god but sin
on womans apparel , because it is an abomination to him : therefore it must certainly be unlawful , yea abominable for players to put on such apparel to act a womans part . if any here object ( as some play
. the minor , as it is evident by the concurrent testimony of the fore - quoted fathers , acts 3 . scene 7 . so it is such an experimental known truth , that it were lost labour for to prove
to make themselves , as it were , neither men nor women , but monsters , ( a sin as bad , nay worse than any adultery , offering a kind of violence to gods own work , ) and all to
womanish effeminacy , whose art it is to speak with his hands and gestures , comes forth upon the stage : and for this one_ i know not whom , nei_her man nor woman , the whole city flock together , that
be abominably sinful , because it is merely voluntary , there being no impulsive cause to move men to it . if the damnation of those who do evil , that good may come of it , be just : much more
his reason is ( and it is saint bernards too ) because one bad man , may happily be reformed by many good ; but many evil men can by no means be over-ruled , or rectified , by any one man
in our present case : it is a good observation of a grave historian : that is far better for a kingdom , to have a bad king and good councellors to advise him , than a good king and bad counsellors
needs be _infull , because it is a strong allective , a vehement temptation unto sin . object . if any here object , that many good divines , many gracious , prous christians resort oft-times to stage - plays , as
with vice . since then it is abundantly evident by the premises , as also by experience ; that common actors are thus excessively vicious , unchaste , profane , and dissolute in their lives , which draws them on to a
that cause they will say it was tolerated in rome , wherein emperors were touched , though they were present . but to such it may be answered ; that in disguised players , given over to all sorts of dissoluteness ,
? and by so match it is pleasing to his disposition and nature ? if ( it be his nature ) to be a bawdy player , and he delight in such filthy and cursed actions , shall we not think him
thing out of wickedness ? it is past the skill of any chymicke , or artist to effect it . certainly , such as the mother is , such is the daughter : that which is borne of the flesh , is
better : but such as it is , take it pledge me quickly , and carouse it off every soap , as i have done to thee , or else thou doest me wrong : ( the usual speech and phrase of
rounds one to another . it is recorded of popelus the second , king of poland ; that having incurred the displeasure of his nobility , through his ill government , for which they intended to depose him : he fained himself
and weighty consequence , because it is a sin ; and so draws eternal death , and condemnation after it . indeed , this is the reason , why heathenish , profane , lascivious , and time , nay , purse consuming
and licentious persons ; yet it is of infinite , and weighty consequence , because it is a sin ; and so draws eternal death , and condemnation after it . indeed , this is the reason , why heathenish , profane
inconveniences of this nature : it is the best , the wisest , and the safest course , to make no bones of pledging healths . to this , i answer ; that i have already manifested this drinking and pledging of
to pledge an health : it is but a kind of preciseness , and it savours of a puritanical_ & factious humour to refuse it : whence , those who make a conscience , and scruple of it , are commonly derided
only to pray for , it is the devil only , and his ministers , that prescribes vs , for to drink the healths of men : which oft times damn their souls . it is therefore , the greatest curtsy ,
delusion doth pretend . lastly it is no breach of allegiance , no point of discourtesy , or disrespect to any , for to refuse their healths : because there is no law of god , of man , or nature ,
and sinful ceremony : wherefore it is no discourteous , uncivil , nor injurious part , to refuse these healths , as this carnal , vain , and false deceit , objection , and delusion doth pretend . lastly it is no
god himself . thirdly , it is far better for thee to incur the ignorant , rash , scandalous , false and iniudicious censure of others , in refusing healths , then to encourage animate , or confirm them in the abuse
god himself ? certainly , it is no unmannerly , humerous , precise , discourteous , nor unseemly part , to obey and please god , rather then men . if thou carrouze , or pledge these healths , thou may chance
discourtious part : yea , it is a beastly , and unnatural part , not to do it : since horses , oxen , and brutish creatures have so much reason and good manners in them , as to refuse to drink
utterly condemn them . wherefore it is no uncivil , unmannerly , discourteous , nor injurious part , for to withstand them , in a discreet , and modest manner : as calisthenes the philosopher did : who being demanded of alexander
or unlawful thing : but it is no discourteous , nor unkind part , to give the denial , or refusal in this case : for else a man might be forced , and drawn to the very foulest sins , and
who doest refuse it . it is an injurious , and discon_teous part , to persuade , or force another , to any vnteasonable , sinful , hurtful , or unlawful thing : but it is no discourteous , nor unkind part
, is no excuse , it is no apology , no plea at all in the court of heaven , or at the bar of gods tribunal , ( to which all healthers shall be summoned ere be long : ) the
needs be evil : because it is an allurement , and provocation to excess : therefore the intent of those who begin these healths , must needs be evil . lastly , i answer : that most men who are given to
needs be evil , because it is vain and idle , and hath no end at all ; and because for every idle action that men shall do , they shall give an account at the day of judgment , as well
an absent friend : now it is usual and lawful , to drink to an absent friend : and therefore by the self same reason , to drink an health . 3 . answ . to this i answer , that the
a base and infamous thing it is , and what a disparagement , and blemish to their honour : to have their names , their healths , and persons , made the very devils sacrifice , and drink - offering , the
, and shame ? undoubtedly it is . as the honour is exceeding small , nay , none at all ; but the dishonour very great , that comes to such , whose healths are frequent in the mouths and cups of
damned , through excess ? it is for the praise and honour of any christians , ( especially of such as represent the person , and place of god on earth ) to be honoured with the very sacrifice and drink -
disputing this question . whether it were lawful for a wise man to enter into a combat , or match of drinking ? where he produces some of them , affirming that he might , so as he did it not voluntarily
observed in our healths . it is a ridiculous thing ( saith athenaeus ) for a man to pray for his wives , or childrens health , and honour , and then to drink healths , till he fall to beating ,
in pledging of healths ) it is all one as to force a man to be thirsty : plini_ condemns them much , who draw on others to drink : and utterly dislikes those laws of drinking which the romans observed ,
drink what he please . it is an evil thing ( saith sophocles ) to drink by force ; ( as men for the most part do in pledging of healths ) it is all one as to force a man to
with the cup : there it is an honour , here a disgrace to overcome . let not one friend draw nor force another to drink : if he doth so , withstand him : and if he will not be contented
have decreed against them . it is recorded of charles the great , maximilian the emperor , and charles the fifth , that they inacted laws against health - drinking : to wit , that no soldier , nor any other person
fathers have condemned them . it is a shame , nay a sacrilege , for a father , a bishop , or pastor , of the church ( whose life should be a light , a pattern , & example unto others
friend to both ? wherefore it is better to part with such friends , then to part with god : and if they will needs drink , let them drink , and perish alone : better it is that one should perish
the valiantest man : and it is an occasion of a just accusation , to refuse to pledge the kings health often : which course and practise he utterly disauowes , as sinful and abominable . saint augustine , is very large
cup into his hand , it is forthwith powered into his mouth by force . thus they continue till all of them are drunken , as well the conquerors , as the conquered . what a sorrowful and miserable spectacle is this
sight of all men : it is within the compass of carrouzing , and drinking wine in bowles : within the verge , of revelling , banqueting , and excess of wine , and riot , according to the will and lusts
fulfil the lusts thereof . it is a scandalous , and offensive thing , which beseems not the gospel of christ , which gives offence to the saints , and church of god , and is not honest and laudable in the
idolatry , and superstition : it is a concomitant , cause , and adjunct of riot , and drunkenness ; a fleshly and carnal lust , and a part and relic of the old man , which makes provision only for the
drunkenness , and excess . it is a worldly , carnal , idle , vain , profane , and heathenish ceremony , ordinance , rudiment , and tradition , and a thing , and rite that savours much ( nay wholely )
, and injunctions . for it is an appearance and spice of evil , and an occasion of much evil , drunkenness , and excess . it is a worldly , carnal , idle , vain , profane , and heathenish ceremony
and by name ( because it was not precisely nor particularly known to the penmen of the scriptures ) yet in gross and general terms : and that so plainly , fully , and punctually , that no man can deny it
storied of vs , as it is of the ancient and modern germans . that they carrouze , and health , and drink so long , till they have laid one another dead drunk under the table , or caused one another
of sin , as if it were a time of looseness and profaneness , not of grace and holiness ; doing more true service to the devil , during this holy time , then all the year besides ) what joy ,
pagans in his times : it is recorded of amphyction king of athens , who was the first that mixed wine ; that he enacted : that men should drink but a little pure wine after meals , but as much mixed
devil - gods : yea it is an invention and practise of the devil and his followers . therefore this drinking of healths must needs be sinful and utterly unlawful unto christians . the mayor is warranted , not only by fathers
as experience testifies ; and it is not enjoined , nor countenanced by any public authority . therefore this drinking of healths , must needs be evil , sinful and unlawful . eleuenthly . that which doth ordinarily and usually tend to
i can think of : it is an apparent occasion of much hurt , of much excess and drunkenness , but it doth no good at all to any who do practise it : it brings no glory at all to god
anon : ) nay , it was never used nor practised in our own nation , for ought that we can hear or read of , till of latter times : it serves to no good , no commendable , nor necessary
unlawful : especially when as it is not enjoined , nor commanded by any public authority . but this drinking of healths , was never practised among godly christians in former ages : ( yea , it was so far from being
and utterly unlawful : because it is a violation of the law of god , of man , and nature . but this drinking ( especially the forcing ) of healths , is against the rules of charity : because it tends
sinful and unlawful : because it is an abuse of gods good creatures . but this drinking and pledging of healths , doth pervert and cross the true end , and right and proper use of drinking : for it makes our
drunkenness and excess : yea it is a kind of shoe - horne to draw on drink in great abundance : therefore it must of necessity be sinful and unlawful . thirdly . that which doth pervert and cross , the true
of spirit , as if it were a maine , a chief and principal article of their faith . that healths are lawful , good , and commendable : whence they accuse and brand all such for puritans , and precisians (
their chiefest residencie ) unless it were in case of necessity when they travel ; ) lift up their voice and cry aloud against them ; not only by their doctrine but by their practise too : let all who bear a
it self : ) else it is like to prove abortive , for want of mid - wife authority to bring it forth : as many other works and writings have done of late , if the complaint of stationers or printers
honour , & solemn oath it is : not only to protect your subjects , from all external violence , wrongs , and dangers ; to preserve their lives , their states , their peace , and liberties ; and to seek
and kingdom : ) hence it is now accounted a part of puritanism , to make a conscience of praying constantly and privately ; but a part of protestanisme , piety , and true devotion , to make no conscience of drinking
gods own injunction , and it was the christians practise even under pagan emperors , in former ages , ) that subjects should make prayers , and supplications , and intercessions for kings , and all that are in authority : not
owes unto your grace . it is ( m ) gods own injunction , and it was the christians practise even under pagan emperors , in former ages , ) that subjects should make prayers , and supplications , and intercessions for
and festival meeting ; yet it is the greatest contumclie , indignity and dishonour to any good or christian king , who should be a very god on earth , ( not only in respect of sovereignty and command : but likewise
and drunkenness ? doubtless though it were the honour of heathen kings , and devil - gods in former ages , to have their healths carouzed and quaffed off at every solemn and festival meeting ; yet it is the greatest contumclie
faith that kings defend ? it was no little grief , nor trouble to great and good king dauid , that he was the drunkards song : and shall it not then be your majesties greatest grief , and chief dishonour ;
as in the elect , it is propounded to them both ; yet not as unto elect and reprobates , nor in absolute & posiciue terms , but as to men who are capable of grace & salvation , if they repent
salvation : to the wicked it is the sauorof death unto death , the rule of life and judgement , the declaration of gods will and pleasure , the cause oftimes of their obduration & greater condemnation , by reason of their
: to the elect , it is the power of god to salvation , the savour of life unto life , & the effectual means of their true conversion & salvation : to the wicked it is the sauorof death unto death
could never do , if it were propounded to the elect alone eleuenthly , the gospel is thus propounded unto all , that so reprobates as well as others might bear witness to it , and acknowledge god and iesus christ as
unto all . ninthly , it is propounded unto all because it works effectually on many reprobates , though not to turn them wholly and fully to the lord , yet to convert them from their atheism , their paganism , idolatries
of men : there ore it is thus preached unto all . ninthly , it is propounded unto all because it works effectually on many reprobates , though not to turn them wholly and fully to the lord , yet to convert
unto all alike , because it is a rule and square of life and judgement unto all . eighthly , it is thus propounded unto all , that so the riches of gods love and mercy to mankind in iesus christ his
grace in all , yet it is a square and rule of life to all that hear it ; and it is that by which they shall * be judged at the last : wherefore though it be effectual to none but
propounded unto all , because it is a rule of life to reprobates as well as others , though it be no salve nor plaster to them for to heal their souls : the gospel though it works not grace in all
to others . seventhly , it is thus propounded unto all , because it is a rule of life to reprobates as well as others , though it be no salve nor plaster to them for to heal their souls : the
mellow ground , not because it is principally intended unto them , but because they are intermixed with the grass , the corn , and fertile ground : and as the fanue doth blow upon the chafe as well as on the
unto all ; but because it is the will , the pleasure and command of god , that it should be thus propounded : as is evident by mark 16 . 16 . luke 10 . 5 , 6 . cap. 24
well as others ? if it were proper and peculiar to the elect alone , it should be preached to none else but they . to this i answer , that the gospel is thus generally propounded unto all , not because
the worser for it , it is from their own defaults , they might have used it better if they would themselves , in having more care and conscience to practise and obey it : so that the gospel is a blessing
to the lord , yet it is not in vain unto them even in this respect . seventhly , reprobates who live under the gospel are sometimes made the instruments and means of good to others , and the furtherers of gods
and cast - aways : it is common in the scriptures , and ordinary in experience , that god sometimes blesses reprobates , and keeps of judgements from them for the godly men's sake that live among them : wherefore though the
mild and harmless ; so it is a means of keeping many judgements from , and pulling down many blessings upon reprobates and cast - aways : it is common in the scriptures , and ordinary in experience , that god sometimes
as any others : therefore it is not altogether in vain unto them , though it convert them not . fourthly , reprobates though they are not truly sanctified not called by the gospel , yet many of them have oft times
and tranquillity with it : it is always accompanied with many great and excellent blessings of which reprobates drink as deep as any others : therefore it is not altogether in vain unto them , though it convert them not . fourthly
vnualuable and matchless blessing ; it is a greater good and happiness then man by all the light of art and nature ( without the scriptures ) can attain unto : therefore no reprobates can say that god deals hardly or falsely
none are excluded ; yet it is always propounded distributiuely , restrictiuely and conditionally in respect of the benefit and comfort of it ; not to men as they are men ; nor to all hearers or reprobates , as they are
as he invites vs , it is not because god himself doth not enable vs , but because we have ensnared our selves in sins and trespasses , and disabled our selves to come unto him as we ought : so that
unto every creature , yet it is not with an intent to convert & save all those that hear it preached , but only true belieuers : this is evident by that commission which christ gave unto his apostles : go ye
of all men , but it is only for the perfecting of the saints , and for the edifying of the body of christ , who are the elect . the preachers of the gospel who are stiled angels , are sent
to every creature , yet it is not with an intent to convert all those that hear it unto god , but only the elect : paul did preach and endure all things , not for all those to whom he preached
from hypocrisy , collusion and deceit , if he hath not seriously purposed
want of licens here ; it was presently refelled by a reverend and learned prelate of our church , doctor robert abbot , bishop of salisbury , whose book now extant , was imprinted by authority ; and dedicated to our royal
hereafter confirmed . and again it was confirmed in ireland , in the articles of religion in the time of our late sovereign , articulo 38 . the author of the appeal pleads against the articles of lambheth , and justifies the
did about the discipline . but it was then the open confession both of the bishops and of the puritanes , that both parts embraced a mutual consent in doctrine , only the difference was in matter of inconformity : then hitherto there
, and m. bucer , it is apparent , both because the doctrine of our church doth not differ from the doctrine that these taught , and because that worthy arch-bishop cranmer caused our leiturgy to be translated into latin , and
suffragated unto our conclusions , it is vndeniablie evident , by their unanimous and general confession of the true christian faith and religion , subscribed by king james himself , his household , with sundry others at edenborough the 28 . of
not communicable unto reprobates . it is evidently warrented and proved , by our 17 . article ; figure ( 7 ) by the 5 . article of lambheth , and the 12 . 13 . 15 . 33 . and 38
, not of regeneration : it was the word of the holy ghost uttered by those prophets which they slew and stoned . ver. 52. which sounded only in their ears : not the renewing and regenerating operation of gods spirit which
is a new creation : it is wrought , not by bare alluring objects , or reasons praesented to the understanding , as arminians dream : but by the almighty power of god : by the self same power that raised christ
11 . he spake and it was done ; he commanded , and it stood fast . the counsel of the lord stands for ever , the thought of his heart , to all generations . psal. 47 . 2 . 3
may know his work : it is turned round about by his counsels , that they may do whatsoever he commands @ upon the face of the world , in the earth . cap. 40 . 8 . 9 . wilt thou
, and in thine hand it is to make great , and to give strength unto all : 2 . cron . 20 . 6 . art not thou god in heaven , and rulest not thou over all the kingdoms of
vaunt and triumph ; therefore it is but vain , absurd & nugatory . secondly , because the scriptures , ( the revealed will of god ) oblige men to believe such things , as god never purposed nor intended to accomplish
the price & merit of it were absolutely in it self , ( though it be not relatiuely or intendedly , ) sufficient to redeem and save even all mankind , had god been pleased to extend it to them , as
as you praetend , since it is not sufficient or alike in all : certainly if men's wills were aequall , and their graces aequall , their desire , their accomplishment of aeternall happiness and salvation , ( which is essential &
to his will : therefore it is not want of will , but power , that berieues them of salvation : if you believe not this , believe the truth him self , who speaks it : many ( saith he )
this life , and so it is not universal : if in the very womb or infancy of all men , then god bestows it when and where it is but useless , and so doth things in vain : since infants
from adam ; for then it were not grace , but nature : not from christ or from his spirit , for they derive grace only to their living and believing members , not generally unto all : & that by means
if the former only ; it is verily then no grace but nature : if the latter , then it must either be an acquisite , derivative , or an infused quality . if acquisite either by art , or industry of
experience witness ; and if it were not so , i see no reason but all men should be saved , all converted , since gods decrees are true , and never fall to ground for want of execution : either therefore
their own salvation ( as it is only , always sure in gods custody ) quite renounce it , since the undoubted ship wrack and damnation of mankind , is the vneuitable consequence , the only benefit that attends it . seuenteenthly
once be saved ? if it were past the power of our father adam in his first and purest state , to keep himself from falling , or his soul from ruin , though he had a power not to sin :
this universal grace is ) it is directly justified and backed by our 9 . 10 . 13 . & 17 . articles , by the express words of the 7 . 8 . and 9 . articles of lambheth , by
and others have observed : it is fully warranted and proved by the 1 . and 4 . articles of lambeth , which well explain our 17 . article in this point , as learned doctor prideaux hath observed ; by the
in the persons elected : it is undoubtedly and manifestly warranted , by the express words of our 13 . and 17 . articles . of the 2 . article of lambheth : of the 14 . article of ireland : of
, in the gross : it is directly , positively , and plainly taught , confirmed , and warranted ; by the fore - aledged 17 . article of our church : by the articles of lambheth article 1 . 3 .
his spirit . 6 th_t it is in the power of men , either finally or totally to resist the inward call , and effectual working of gods spirit in their hearts , in the very act of their cōuersion , so
. section , whereas as it is only named in the english . from this recantation , and the carriage of it ; it is clearly evident ; that the university of cambridge in those days , did undoubtedly believe and maintain
others make some mention ) it was fairly printed and published in queen elizabeths days , ( some copies of it being yet extant ) in the very selfsame words , and form as here you see it . and that none
is therefore fained , because it is temporary , ) is distinguished , and differs from that saving faith , whereby sinners apprehending christ , are justified before god for ever ; not in measure , and degrees , but in the
proud , forasmuch , as it is in his own nature contingent , of what kind the perseverance of every man is : neither did i affirm it to be proud only , but to be most wicked . but now i
. by this short tale it is evident , whence and by what means wee attain to be righteous . for not by the worthiness of our deservings , were wee either heretofore chosen , or long ago saved , but by
self , by our self it is not possible to come by it , a great pity it were that we should lose so profitable knowledge . let vs therefore meekly call upon that bountiful spirit the holy ghost , which proceeds
hitherto done and committed . it is the holy ghost , and no other thing , that doth quicken the minds of men , stirring up good and godly motions in their hearts , which are agreeable to the will and commandment
made round : but because it is first made round , therefore it turns round . so , no man doth good works , to receive grace by his good works : but because he hath first received grace , therefore consequently
vs from him . for it is of the free grace and mercy of god , by the mediation of the blood of his son iesus christ , without merit or deserving on our part , that our sins are forgiven vs
them to say , as it is written , thou lord art our father and redeemer , and thy name is without beginning and everlasting . god gave them then grace to be his children , as he doth vs now .
po_estate vniusc_iusque hominis , servari. it is not in the will , or power of every one , to be saved . these articles of lambheth how ever some may chance to slight them as the resolutions of some private men :
do vainly talk ) but it is the fault and corruption of the nature of every man , that naturally is engendered of the off-spring of adam , whereby man is very far gone from original righteousness , and is of his
antithesis to new arminianisme . it is the advice and counsel of an ancient father , for the suppression of such haeresies , or upstart errors , which seek to shroud themselves under the fraudulent covert of wrested and mis - applied
hath crept into them . it is but a bridge , an usher unto popery , and all popish ceremonies , which wind themselves into our church apace ( if parliament complaints prove true ) by their arminian agents , as some
state - disturbing heresy : it is but a desperate , and bloody error , which cuts off all peace , all joy , all comfort , and salvation from the souls of men : especially from broken hearts , and wounded
for to vent them . it is the policy of our romish achitophels , to train up their schollers in their own popish authors , and to inhibit the transportation , much more the reading of any protestant ( yea of some
more then ever . strange it is to see , and lamentable to consider , how the excellent , orthodox , eminentest , and learned impressions of the most transplendent lamps , and ornaments of our church ( whose very names strike
can contradict it . therefore it is wholly with this declaration , not against it . lastly , his majesties declaration , prohibits principally , unnecessary disputes about curious , nice , and needless school - points , of which men may
against all opposers : therefore it is not within the intent or limits , ( and so not within the danger ) of his majesties declaration , which i would not wilfully , not willingly oppose . secondly , i conceive ,
which is far worse : it was the complaint of a reverend and learned prelate of our church about some ten years since , in an epistle dedicatorie unto his majesty then prince of wales : that the stinking vapors of arminius
special manner to protect . it is not , yea it cannot be unknown to your gravities , that old pelagius , and faustus , who have lain dead and rotten in their graves 1100 years , or more , have by
a word or two . it is storied of the chief priests and pharises ( who were ever the greatest and most embittered enemies to christ and his apostles , as their successors , who will needs be stiled priests , have
, its endless grave ? it was said by one of note , some few years past : ( and i wish it may be prophetically true at least . ) tulit malum hoc & sustulit brittania_ : that england had both
, spread the faster : it is the breaking , not the bruising of the root that kills it . the mowing down of weeds , of grass ; the lopping off of lesser branches doth never hinder , but advance their
conusance of religion now ? it is the positive resolution of all the fathers , of all pro_estant , ( and i think of most popish ) divines : that kings , and temporal magistrates , ought to be the chief defenders
stoup at the name when it is read , not understanding what it means , or , what is read concerning him . and also in sitting and not veyling at the name of christ , emanuel , god the father ,
sacrifice unto him ; but it was said unto him : hath the lord as grea_ pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifices , as when his voice is obeyed ? behold , to obey is better than sacrifice , and to hearken
in the other . and it is known what is said of civil honour , that it rather stands on the will and judgement of the giver , than of the taker , which is clean contrary in the honour of god
the field , as when it is erected in the church or chancells . to your other reason , that in reverence wee uncover our heads at the name of princes : wee answer , that , if it were so ;
, their reason , allthough it were likely cannot bear it out . and whereas they would free themselves from superstition in syllables , because they bow not at the name of iesus the son of syrach , as to iesus the
as iesus christ ? and it is a pittyfull case , to see these profane subtleties of heretics to take place in religion , which were ridiculous in all other trade of life . when we hear our prince or sovereign named
capp and knee , whenever it is heard ? will you put of your capp , when the prince is named , and will you make courtesies at the popes name , at his triple crown or cross , and will you
thereby declaring how far greater it was to be christ , than to have the litterall name of iesus . all which places , with many more ought truly to teach and persuade our souls , to look for his office ,
especially in the scriptures , it is a familiar speech . paul therefore , by this word , name , signifies high and great power to be given to christ , and christ , to be set in chiefest degree of honour
and honour , and so it is used almost in all tongues , especially in the scriptures , it is a familiar speech . paul therefore , by this word , name , signifies high and great power to be given to
show this sufficiently , for it is said , god gave him a name , that is above all names , that all knees should bow in that name ; which words if ye will apply unto the divine worship , as
of his name : as it is written by paul , phil . 2 , 9 , 10 . he gave him a name , which is above all names , that in ( so he _wice renders it ) the name
was in former times , it was not used of necessity then , much less now . our prelates therefore should not so enforce it , both upon ministers and people as they do , nor yet suspend , silence , imprison
of all other names , it was most derided and scorned of the pagans and iewes , and therefore they did the more honour it . but now there is greater danger of popish superstition in abusing holy things , then of
name of iesus , as it is used in popery , to bend the knee at the sound thereof , is not commanded in this place of phil . 2 . 10 , 11 . which showed especially the subjection of all
, at it , when it is recited , when time of necessity comes shall receive no comfort by it , ) be not a mere fabulous bugbear and groundless commination , warranted by no scripture nor example ; much like that
of us , since doubtless it is not enjoined or prescribed by this , or any other text of scripture ? and whether the misalleaginge and mistranslating of phil . 2.9 , 10 , 11 . of purpose to justify this ceremony
, when , and because it is named ; not at other seasons , when his person , is as really , as fully , represented to them under other of his names and titles ; not to this his name in
ecclesiastici christo genn flectere ; it is an ecclesiastical custom to pray kneeling to christ , ( not ies_s ) be a convincinge authority to prove ; that the primitive christians used to bow at the name of iesus , not of
, 10 .11 . therefore it is neither to be practised nor endured among christians , who believe the pari_ie and equality of the trinity both in essence , internal and external , honour , adoration , and veneration to . whether
of the one when ever it were mentioned , but neglect to do it when the other two are named ; would not this intimate , one of them to be more honourable , or of greater authority then the other two
and respect , then when it is only religiously and reverently used and uttered in the church , without any irreverence , contempt or dishonour offered to it ? and if bowing at the name iesus in the church , be a
swearing , blaspheminge , when it is most contemned , vilified , abused , and so needs most honour and respect , then when it is only religiously and reverently used and uttered in the church , without any irreverence , contempt
bow unto it , because it is not the name of god , or christs divinity , but of his humanity only as these fathers teach ; or else this proposition ( god cannot be anointed ) must be false , because
them before christ , and it was given to christ principally not as he was god , but man upon his nativity and circumcision math. 1.21 .25 . chap. 2 .1 . luke 1.31 . chap. 2.31 . acts 4.27 ? whether
the name of iesus because it is the name of god , and because saviour ( as he saith ) is the chiefest name of god ; doth not more strongly infer , that we should rather bow at the name of
the name of god as it is not : as is most evident , they differing in words , in use in all languages , the one being a christen name imposed at his circumcision the other a title or surname ;
by his works . now it is as evident as the sun at noone - tide , that these devotions of our author are wholly popish both in method , manner , form , and use , and all concurring circumstances ;
plea ; as in truth it is , though the printer bear the name : i answer in the second place , that our author may be to partial a judge in his own behalf : and therefore he must re_erve himself
that it always hath , it is , and ever will be , the beaten rode , and method , of all insinuating , and seducing spirits , to couch , and broach their errors at the first , as warily ,
to them : ) therefore it is now impossible to suppress them . secondly , those who should have suppressed , and crushed them in the shell , are now such sanctuaries , and shelters to them : that in steed of
of these two : yet it is still furnished with those 18 . other points of popery which i have formerly deduced from it : and that popish trash , and romish absurdities , which i have discovered in my precedent conclusions
which protestants do disclaim . it were well therefore , if this our authors friend were enquired after , that so we might know his religion by his friend : which is in part discovered by his book . thirdly , i
, when as in truth it is the authors own , as the printer hath in part confessed : these devotions therefore being printed but for the benefit of some private friends , without any intennt to make them public , may
scandalous , i say , it is to our own church . first , because it makes , ( or at least endeavours for to make : ) one of the most renownedst members of our church , even that unparalleled queen
and vnholy seasons , because it is a sacrament , ( as he sti_es it ) or an holy ordinance : and so incongruous & unseemly at such vulgar times : and so altogether unlawful at any season : and then no
the selfsame place : because it is a festival , pleasurable , and joyful ordinance of god : at ordinary , common , and vnholy seasons , because it is a sacrament , ( as he sti_es it ) or an holy
no such holy exercise : it is a joyful and festival ordinance , and always hath been so reputed : therefo_e unseasonable for festival and joyful seasons : this is our authors learned argument which needs no other respondent but it self
ghost or spirit , unless it were the catholic and public spirit of the church of rome ? again , he certifieth vs : that all deacons and ministers , ( and much more laics then , ) are enjoined by the
and scorn , so likewise it is the ready way to overturn , all conscionable , profitable , and frequent hearing , preaching , yea , and practise too : since las_e preachers make but drowsy hearers , and key - cold
and practise therefore , as it is a means to bring the ministry into contempt , and scorn , so likewise it is the ready way to overturn , all conscionable , profitable , and frequent hearing , preaching , yea ,
be no sacrament , yet it is your duty thus to teach , to visit , and reside among them . but lest some should tax , and censure me , as being a nonresident from my intended matter ; i will
done on earth , as it is in heaven . 4 give vs this they our daily bread , 5 and forgive vs our trespasses , as wee forgive them that trespass against vs . 6 and lead vs not into temptation
done on earth , as it is in heaven . 4 give vs this day our daily bread . 5 and for give vs our trespasses , as wee forgive them that trespass against vs . 6 and lead vs not into
laurence . besides this , it is the custom in england to fast all fridayes , ( except within the twelve days , and easter week : ) also other three eves of our lady , to wit , of the purification
our common prayer book : it is clear and evident by the former differences : there is not in these private prayers , nor in our common prayer book any such trash , as his several prologues , and prefaces , as
munkes , and nuns ; it is impossible for any to conjecture ( unless they will condemn , and tax our author , of gross and palpable folly , and improvidence : ) but that the end of publishing these devotions in
and prayer books : ) it is as evident as the sun at noone - day ; that the very subject matter of these devotions , is merely popish ; which was my fifth , and chiefest proof , to evidence ,
holy times : so likewise it is a festival , and joyful thing , and so most seasonable , and suitable , for festival , and joyful times , and seasons ; as the scriptures , and daily practise of all christians
this hereafter . fourthly , it is evident both by the statutes of king edward the 6 . and queen elizabeth , and the proclamations of king james of happy memory : for the uniformity of common prayer : ( which master
page . 272 . so it is , so clear an evidence for the mediation of angels : ( a doctrine which our church , and all good protestants , do utterly renounce : ) that our author , who in his
heavenly tabernacle : this as it was borrowed from missale romanum : canon missae page . 272 . so it is , so clear an evidence for the mediation of angels : ( a doctrine which our church , and all good
mend his cause , because it is now more suitable to ledesma , and our ladies primer , then before : and so more likely to infer this popish conclusion : that there are some sins , which are but venial in
may be lawfully made : it is covertly , and necessarily intimated in his first division of such who do offend , against the second commandment : offenders against the second commandment ( saith he ) are , they that fancy to
been an apostolical constitution . it is no humane invention ( as they call it ) but it comes from divine authority , that we fast our forty days in lent . the last week of lent is an holy week ,
and matter . first , it is merely popish , in regard of the frontispiece . for , if you view the fore - front of these devotions , you shall find these three capital letters ; ( i h s. )
devotions is merely popish ; it is most clearly evident : first , from its frontispiece : secondly , from its title : thirdly , from its frame and method : fourthly , from its stile and phrases : fiftly , from
. which religion , as it is the breath and fragrant odor of our nostrils ; the delight and pleasure of our eyes ; the sweetest harmony and music to our ears ; the most luscious honey and manna to our palates
abstain from work , as it is an impediment to the performance of such duties as are then commanded . saint hierome on the eighteenth of the acts , affirms , that saint paul , when he had none to whom to
be taken out , because it was the jewish sabbath ; nor could be suffered to be taken thence the next day following , because the lords day , celebrated by the christians : and so , betwixt both days , he
law binds not , as it was published and proclaimed by moses ; but as at first it appertained no less unto the gentiles , than the iewes ; and afterwards , was explaned and confirmed by christ , in his holy
our fanatic and peevish spirits it were best to send , to make enquiry for this river ; while in mean time wee do unfold , and for as much as in us is , compose the differences , which have been
but the substance moral . it is , as abulensis hath it , a dictate of the law of nature , that some set time be put apart for gods holy worship : but it is ceremonial and legal , that this
stand with reason . therefore it is resolved on by the wiser sort , that there is in the fourth commandment something moral , and some things ceremonial ; the circumstances ceremonial , but the substance moral . it is , as
cap. 4 . and thereupon it is affirmed by iustin martyr , in his dialogue with trypho , and bed in his hexameron , that many of those former times were renowned for sanctity , which neither kept the sabbath , or
promulgation of the same , it is not yet agreed upon amongst the learned . some fetch the original thereof from the beginning of the world , when god first blessed the seventh day , and sanctified it . whence well this
in the decalogue , being it is become to many a rock of offence ; it will not happily be unwelcome to the wavering mind , so to determine of the point , that they may have something whereupon to fasten .
second book against appion . it is well known from what corrupt channel these derivations have been drawn by the elder iewes ; who by their bacchanalian rites , gave the world just occasion to suspect , that they did consecrate their
bound to keep it . it is not my intent to lay before you such further etymologies , as either are afforded us from plutarch , and the rest of greece ; who fetch it from , to triumph , dance ,
their labours . and being it is the seventh year , since i first attained unto this place ; and that there want not some litigious differences about the sabbath , which have of late disturbed the quiet of the church :
and hide her nakedness . it is my office ( as you know ) according to the custom of this place , honestly to dismiss them hence , being now furnished and provided ; after all their labours . and being it
called christian . yet so it is , i skill not how it comes to pass , but so it is , that some amongst us have revivd again the jewish sabbath , though not the day it self , yet the
it self , according as it is related in the enlargement of boterus by robert iohnson , all honest exercises , shooting in pieces , long - bows , cross - bows , &c. are used on the sabbath day , and
church , as at first it was . neither was he the only one that hath so determined . for , for the first , that to keep holy one day of seven , is not the moral part of the fourth
present time , as first it was , when from the saturday they translated it unto the sunday . so that we see , that calvin here resolves upon three conclusions : first , that the keeping holy of one day in
less jewish , than before it was . these taught , as now some do , moralem esse unius diei observationem in hebdomada , the keeping holy to the lord one day in seven , to be the moral part of the
strange opinion ( for now it is revived and published : ) i might perhaps persuade my self to entertain it . but to proceed . immediately upon the reformation of religion in these western parts , the controversy brake out afresh
and terrible comminations , if it were not punctually observed . the letter is at large repeated by roger de hoveden ; and out of him , as i suppose , by matth . paris : who do withal repeat the miracles
which latitude of time , it was not lawful to do any kind of work what ever , no not so much as to bake bread on saturday for the sundays eating ; to wash or dry linen for the morrows wearing
the darker times , as it is thought by some , peter de bruise the founder of the petrobusians ( he was burnt for heresy anno 1126 . ) began to draw too deep on these lees of iudaisme ; which here
your virtue more , because it is conjugal . 3 be long expected in your thrones above ! and stay on earth until our judgements know the noble use of that we so much love ; thus heaven still lends what we
( 1 ) we know it is more lawful far than possible to sing your praise , who shows how gentle , wise , and just you are , must trace wide measures , not in common ways . ( 2 )
and his shame . aurora it is true , should he appear , he were undone , and eclipsed though in his pride of noone . hesperus yet in her looks he will least of danger find , she darkens those with beauties
for ever last , though it is not limited how far , because it still is circular , yet sure he cannot tire , nor mortally wax old , nor's universal beams grow cold , since fed with immaterial fire . hesperus
of silver , and in it was written lvminalia: under all this ran a large valens of gold embroidered with flowers and great tassels . the kings majesty being seated under the state , the curtain in an instant disappeared discovering a
. ( 3 . ) it is well designed ! thanks to thy courteous art ! let's murmure softly in each others ear , and those we first invoked , will straight appear ! enough ! they come ! to'th woods let's
. ( 3 . ) it is time to wake our drowsy art , and try if we have power to hinder destiny . mount ! mount ! our charms ! fetch me , whilst you aspire , a spirit of the
( 2 . ) indeed it is a cold northerly opinion ; and i'le lay my life begot since their late great frosts . it will be long enough ever it shall spread , and prosper in the south ! or if
to open , and in it was seen sitting a beautiful woman ; her garment was sky-colour set all with stars of gold , her head was crowned with laurel , with a spangled veil hanging down behind , and her hair
anger o'er the brow ? it is time to fly , and my best swiftness use , lest killed with pins , and bodkins for my news . the page retires , and the noble persian youths make their entry , apparelled
leave i hope ; and it is to think how you deceive your selves with all this precious art , and care tan in your glass to dress your looks , and hair ! when ( in good faith ! ) they
title shall we call since it were lessening of thy stile , if we should name thee natures admiral ! ( 5 ) thou universal wonder know we all in darkness morn till thou appear , and by thy absence dulled may
universal voice i hear , it is fit you vanish quite when they appear . exeunt merlin , imposture . in the further part of the scene , the earth opened and there rose up a richly adorned palace , seeming all
down did lay ( for it was all he eat on fasting day ) enter giant , knight and damsel . dwarf they come , in's rage he spurn's up huge tree roots , now stick to lady knight , and up
my sect . merlin . it is long since this my magic rod hath struck the air yet loss of practice can no art impair , that soars above the reach of natures might , thus then i charm the spirits of
of frogs . action . it is confessed ; there are some sullen clarks that love to injure and to scant themselves , yet you may find a few whose wisdoms merit greater sway that will allow us pleasures 'bove our cares
out their time , and it were sin in us to dance , the nightingale to sing her tragic tales of love , and wee to recreate our selves with groans , as if all perfumes for the tiger were ordained cause
parted friends . action . it is possible 'lesse you steal in amongst them to disturb their peace , disguisd in a canonick weed , nor are these such , that by their reasons strict and rigid discipline , must fright nice
to gather clouds apace , it is no safe tarrying in so fierce a place . whilst thou hast time retire o wearied bark into safe harbour : when the clouds which dark the worlds bright eye , shall be dispelled away
new masters of spain . it is in compass 1400 miles : enjoys a temperate air , a fertile soil , rich mines , amber , & sugar . in 16 days herbs will ripen , and roots also , and be
to waste them homeward . it is seated on the northern shore , as also is s. iago , this last being built by iago , or james de valasco , and of him so named . the other towns of note
and broad 70 miles . it is full of forests , lakes , and mountains : and was first made known to the europaeans , by columbus his second navigation . the people here are prohibited the eating of serpents , as
in breadth 70 miles . it is well watered hath two towns of note ; oristana , and seuill ; & acknowledges columbus for its first discoverer . 7 cvba , called also fernandina , is long 300 , and broad 70
first that set foot in it was john ponce a spaniard , anno 1527 . the principal cities are s. iohns , and 2 port rico ; ruined by henry earl of cumberland , anno 1597 . 6 iamaica or insula s.
_ituate north of guiana . it is in length 50 , in breadth 18 miles ; and is called also insula s. iohan . the first that set foot in it was john ponce a spaniard , anno 1527 . the principal
distant from the former . it was discovered by columbus , in his last voyage , anno sc: 1497: and is well stored with tobacco . 4 bacalaos are certain isles iying against the influxe of canada , nigh unto corterialis ;
field 300000 fighting men . it was called by the spaniards , imperial ; because at their first coming into this province , they found eagles with two heads , made of wood , set upon the doors & houses of it
it from the river . it is an archbishops see , and residence of the peruvian vice roy . 4 cusco the seat of the ancient kings of this nation : who the more to beautify this city , commanded every one
, being called collao . it is built with much art , for all the chief streets answer to the market place : & there is scarce any private house which hath not water conueyed to it from the river . it
out - vied him as it were in strength and treasury : notwithstanding his mines in spain , italie , barbary , india , mexicana , & these of peru ; which we now handle , and which gave occasion to this
in this s_blunary world , it is never like to take : and so i leave it , telling you that it is by many thought that this extraordinary plenty of gold and silver , since the discovery of these countries ,
coin , then ever formerly it was . our ancestors the britains , used brass rings , and iron rings , for their instruments of exchange , the most usual material of money among the roman provinces , was seldom gold or
that swinish vice ; wherein it is to be feared , they have now out - gon their teachers , the dutch . the people hold opinion , that men use after their burial , to eat , drink , and wantonnize
taken now as medicinal : it is grown a good - fellow , and fallen from a physician to a complement . a folly which certainly had never spread so far , if here had been the same means of prevention used
to the kings palace . it is situate on a lake of salt water , 200 leagues in length ; and is by the spaniards called el dorada ( or the gilded city ) from the abundance of gold both in coin
part of the istmus . it is admirably stored with silver , spices , pearls , and medicinal herbs : and is divided into four provinces , viz: 1 castella del or.o 2 nona andaluzia . 3 nova granata . 4 cartagena
105 miles in breadth . it is called also the river of the three brothers , and by some the river of s. laurence . it takes name from gaspar corterialis , a portugall , who first discovered it , ao 1500.
, the people barbarous . it was discovered by iaques cartier , of france , anno 1534: and is inhabited besides the natiues , with some few frenchmen . the chief towns are canada . 2 sanguinai , seated on rivers so
town . 3 dalefeguift . it was discovered by the english at the directions and charges of sr walter rawleigh , anno 1584 , and in honour of our virgin queen , was called virginia . the english have diverse times gone
in some sort fortefied . it is watered with the rivers quibequesson , and apanawapeske . the chief towns are 1 kequoughton , 2 james town . 3 dalefeguift . it was discovered by the english at the directions and charges of
florida erat regio , because it was a flourishing country . for indeed the country abounds with goodly fruits , & hath good quantity of gold and silver : emeralds are also found here , and so are turquosies and pearls .
, anno 1497 . afterward it was possessed by john ponce , a spaniard , 1527 ; who called it florida , because he came first to it on easter day , which the spaniards call pascha florida ; or else quia
the south , virginia . it was discovered by the english , under the guiding of sebastian cabot , anno 1497 . afterward it was possessed by john ponce , a spaniard , 1527 ; who called it florida , because he
but especially about guatimala . it is situate over against the isle cuba , & is divided into three parts : i , iucutan , whose cities of greatest worth , are campechium , sidalancum ; and one , which for its
cordoua , anno 1517 . it was called iucutan not as some conceit it , from ioctan the son of heber , who they think came out of the east , where the scripture places him , ( gen . 10.30 )
but it withers presently . it is as plentiful of parrets , as england is of crows ; and hath a lake 300 miles in compass , which having no intercourse with the ocean , doth yet ebb and flow continually .
concerning quiuira in general , it is time we should proceed to her provinces , which are cibola , and nova albion . cibola , lies on the east side , and takes its name from the chief city : the next
into this new world . it is full of herbage , and enjoys a temperate ayre : the people are desirous of glass more then of gold ; & in some places are cannibals . the chief riches of this country ,
, or much south . it is 900 miles in compass ; and hath two ports , one between the farthest part of iucutan , and the isle of cuba , at which the tide with a violent stream enters : the
all the country ; rich it is , populous , and governed after the form of a common-wealth , under the protection of the king of spain . 2 villeriche , a port - town , very wealthy , because all the
only it yields precedence . it is seated in the pleasantest part of all the country ; rich it is , populous , and governed after the form of a common-wealth , under the protection of the king of spain . 2
in circuit 80 leagues . it is one of the best countries of new spain , abounding in mulberry trees , silk , honey , wax , black amber , and such store of fish , that from them it took its
name called couliacan ; stony it is , and rough , as the rest of nova gallicia ; yet yielding mines of gold in good plenty . the chief town is s. michael , where is a colonie of spaniards . 2
devoured of wild beasts . it is divided into four parts , viz: nova gallicia , 2 mechuachan , 3 guastachan , 4 tremistitan . 1 gallicia nova is watered with the rivers piastla , and s. sebastian . the principal cities
from the old world . it was very populous before the arrival of the spaniards , who in 17 years slew 6 millions of them ; rosting some , plucking out the eyes ; cutting off the arms of others ; and
which the people eat : it is very much furnished with goldemines . and glories in the mountain pr_pochampathe , which is of the same nature with aetna , and vesuvius . the limits of it are on the east , incutan
kept continually certain images as it were , made of cotton wool , like to our childrens babies . to these they did do great reverence , as supposing the spirit of their zemes to be in them : & the devil
magadascar ) sure i am it was not america , and returned home , wanting not ( as he told the senate ) sea - room , but victuals . thirdly they produce these verses of seneca , to infer a knowledge
by vs island oade : it is in compass 18 miles , and was the last place that held out for don antonio against the castilians . the second island of note is s. michaell , famous in that our modern geographers
of capricorne ; nigh unto it is the isle of helens : they are both under the command of the spaniard . the last took name from the saints day where on it was discovered ; and the first , because when
it was first discovered , it was nothing but a wood ; but is now inhabited by portugalls , and negroes : the negroes attaining diverse times to 100 years of age ; the portugalls never exceeding 50. wheat here sown never
city is pavoasan . when it was first discovered , it was nothing but a wood ; but is now inhabited by portugalls , and negroes : the negroes attaining diverse times to 100 years of age ; the portugalls never exceeding
in compass 180 miles : it is of a round figure , and lies directly under the equinoctial line . it is so fruitful of sugar , that 40 ships are laden with it every year : the prime city is pavoasan
of the one ( as it is reported ) not being healthy to the others inhabitants . 3 st thomas is in compass 180 miles : it is of a round figure , and lies directly under the equinoctial line . it
ginger , and silver ; it is enriched with safe harbours , fair rivers , and plenty of fruit , and cattle : a country too good for so base a people . for besides their two good qualities aboue - mentioned
under the southern tropic . it was discovered by the portugalls , ao 1506 ; the people are treacherous and vnhospitable ; they used not to trade with others , neither suffered they others to trade with them : & though the
in the body politic , it is a perilous matter to receive more succours , then what ( after they have done the deed they were sent for ) we may either with conueniency reward and settle with vs ; or at
of the body natural , it is hurtful to a mans health and life , to take more physic then it may ( after the effect thereof be wrought ) either digest , or put out again : so in the body
their flock . now as it is unsafe for a prince to commit the guard of his person to the faith of foreigners : so also is it dangerous for him , in the defence of his realm or state , to
the egyptian . so unsafe it is for a prince to commit the tuition of his person , or the defence of his realm to such ; whom hope of profit , and not natural allegiance makes faithful . our constance was
mention , in whose time it is thought abraham went down into egipt . he , and his successors , were all called pharaohs , whom we will omit till we come to amasis : who for his politic institutions , deserves
and perseverance . hence figuratively it is used , sometimes for precedence , as huic equidem consilio palmam do , in terence , sometime for the victory it self , as non auferent tamen hanc palmam , in plinie ; & plurimarum
the life of man . it is the nature of this tree , though never so huge or ponderous a weight were put upon it , never to yield to the burden ; but still on resist the heaviness thereof , and
a fig , and finally it is said to yield whatsoever is necessary to the life of man . it is the nature of this tree , though never so huge or ponderous a weight were put upon it , never to
in length 1600 miles . it is _amous for the miraculous passage of the israelits through it , & the drowning of pharaoh cenchres , & his people ; as also for that through it the spices of india & arabia were
as also sinus arabicus . it is in length 1600 miles . it is _amous for the miraculous passage of the israelits through it , & the drowning of pharaoh cenchres , & his people ; as also for that through it
, as herodotus writes . it is supposed by many good divines , and recorded by iosephus , that the bricks which the children of israel did burn , were partly employed about such pyramides . but now barbara pyramidum sileat miracula
aegyptiorum , was situated . it is in compass but 8 miles , within which space are 18000 streets ; whereof every one hath two gates : which being locked , make every street an impregnable castle ; which selimus the first
citizens attributed divine honour . it is now called sues , and is a haven town standing at the very no_th end of the red sea : in the time of the ptolemies a town of great commerce , now almost abandoned
producing live creatures also , it is even to wonder fruitful : as ovid , nam que que ubi deseruit madidos septemfluus agros nilus , & antiquo sua flumina reddidit alveo ; plurima cultores versis animalia glebis inveniunt— for when the seven-mouthed
and princes thereof . and it is by authors of good credit related , that in the 10th and 11th year of cleopatra , the river increased not : which was observed to be a fore - teller of the fall of
- flow the country , it is not only the usher to a following dearth ; but prognosticateth some ensuing mischief to the state and princes thereof . and it is by authors of good credit related , that in the 10th
having its stomach ( as it were ) over - laid , and surcharged with too much liquor : but if the mean be granted , there is no country can brag of such abundance , the corn being all inned before
bottom , but four . it is situate between the second and the fifth climates , so that the longest day is 13 hours , and a half . the inhabitants , though this country lie in the same climate with barbary
like a pyramid reversed , it is in some places but 37 miles broad , & at the very point or bottom , but four . it is situate between the second and the fifth climates , so that the longest day
call it misre . 2 it was named oceana , from oceanus a king hereof . 3 o_iriana , from osiris . 4 aegyptus , from egypt ; being the surname of rameses , a prince of great power . the country
river coanzo brought thither . it is the principal haven - town of these parts . this country is watered by the rivers bengo . 2 coanzo. 3 dande . 4 loz_ . 5 ambres . 6 zai . the people hereof
name ; caused ( as it is thought ) by the mud and dirt , which the river coanzo brought thither . it is the principal haven - town of these parts . this country is watered by the rivers bengo .
a carpet of grass ; it is called the table of the cape , and yields a large prospect over the sea on all sides . the sea here is very rough & tempestuous , & hath to the spaniards proved oftentimes
of india ; but whether it were the island of sumatra , or one of the molucco's , or the land of malavar , called by the ancients , aurea chersonesus , i dare not determine : considering what worthy men maintain
, began . 2ly , it is impossible for the navy of solomon , which lay at ezion geber , to have spent 3 years in coming hither , & returning : which we find to have bin the usual times of
a queen to travel ; it is very probable when shisacke king of egypt spoiled hierusalē , in the reign of rhehoboam ; that the king of aethiopia , who , if this be true , was at that time the son
; & arabia , when it is written with e shin ; this cōcei_ , is in my opinion ( as the rest of that strain are ) more nice then wise ; it being evident , that both sheba the son
criticism that sheba , when it was writtē with e samech , must be rendered aethiopia ; & arabia , when it is written with e shin ; this cōcei_ , is in my opinion ( as the rest of that strain
, or from ; because it was ordained by law : pecunia , either because in elder times , the chief of their wealth consisted in cattle ( as now among the irish ) or from a cow ( pecus ) which
romans , to ianus . it is called nū mus , or from ; because it was ordained by law : pecunia , either because in elder times , the chief of their wealth consisted in cattle ( as now among the
afterward in justice commutatiue , it was deemed convenient to have some common judge , or valuation of the equality or inequality of goods : the invention of which , the iewes attribute to cain : the grecians , to hermodice ,
colorem . their blood ( it is thought ) drawn to the outward part , the aethiopians grew so black and swart . but the true cause of it and its speculation , i will defer till i come to treat of
and also interior , because it is encompassed about with the other ( unless where it is bounded with lybia , and the land of negroes north ) is called also abasine , either from abbess a prime river hereof , or
aethiopia called svperior , because it is more north then the other : and also interior , because it is encompassed about with the other ( unless where it is bounded with lybia , and the land of negroes north ) is
iudaea . 3ly , whereas it is said in the 29 of ezechiel , that the land of egypt should be laid wast from the town of siene , to the borders of aethiopia : if it be meant of this place
extent . 2ly , whereas it is said in the second of chron : cap. 14 . that zerah king of the aethiopians , came against asa , with an host of a million and 300 chariots : this cannot properly be
, tells vs how there it is the custom , for some reverend old sire , to bring in naked the young man ; and some hoary old matron to present naked the young woman , between whom a marriage is motioned
as at the indies . it is so called , either because the people are of a black colour , or from the river niger . this river from the fifteenth day of june , overflows al the adjacent fields , the
yield store of milk . it is ill inhabited , by reason of the abundance of sands , so that in some places the towns are 300 miles distant . the ayre is of that nature , that if any one be
abounds with dates , whence it is called dactylorum regio , and in the arabic biledulgerid , which signifies also a date region . these date tree . are some male , some female ; the first brings forth only flowers ;
rents , for so much it was , anno 1526 when leo afer wrote . the merchants have there a court or exchange , enclosed with a strong wall , with 12 gates , and 15 streets . there is also a
id_e a mahumetan prince . it is divided by the river sabu into 3 parts , all of which contain 82000 households , and 700 moschees , or saracenicall temples : the chief of which is carne , or caraven , being
aboue half his men . it is situate in or nigh unto the place of iol , ot caesarea ; and is esteemed to contain about 1000 families . the buildings are very sumptuous ; the innes , bathes , and temples
the romans ; whose guise it was ( as tacitus notes ) habere servitulis instrumenta etiam reges . the first king was hiempsal , who relieved marius in exile : the second was hiarba , an other of the marian faction ,
to rome , whose rival it was in wealth , valour , and desire of the universal empire . vrbs antiqua fuit ( tyrij tenuêre colon_ ) carthago , italiam contra , tyberina que que longè ostia , dives opum , studijs
. this act , as it was pleasing to the nobles and commons of rome ; so was it as distasteful to maximinus , and his faction . capellianus an other of his procurators , with a sufficient army , set upon
on the west algiers . it is divided into 5 provinces , bearing the names of the metropolis : 1 constantina , in which is bona , where s. augustine was borne ; and hippo where he was bishop . 2 bugia
, and tingitana ; now it is usually divided into the kingdoms of 1 tunis , 2 algeirs , 3 fesse , & 4 morocco : all which are of like fertility , and peopled with the like inhabitants . the fertility
. the usual division of it is into 1 barbary , 2 numidia , 3 lybia , 4 the land of negro's , 5 aethiopia interior , 6 aethiopia exterior , 7 egypt , and 8 the lands . of barbary .
sail into palestine , because it was saturday ; the better to cousin his conscience , hired a ianizary to beat him aborde ; which task the ianizary partly in love to knavery , and partly in hate to the nation ,
to be inhabited ; because it is situate under the torrid zone , and therefore took its name from & , that is , without cold . pomponius mela guessed the more inward parts thereof to be inhabited with strange people ,
at the night time . it was formerly a famous university , this rhodes , marseils , alexandria , athens , and tarsus being the old academies of the roman monarchy : and hither tiberius withdrew himself , when augustus had declared
all the turkish empire . it is inhabited only by turks and iewes , the christians having free commerce and traffice in it all the day time : but on pain of death leaving it at the night time . it was
that the little finger of it was as big as an ordinary man : the brass of this statua was so much , that when mnaui general of caliph osmen , united this isle to the mahumetan empire ; it loaded 900
province of lesser asia . it is in circuit 120 miles , and takes denomination from rhodes the chief city , honoured with the mighty colossus ; made by chares of liudum , in the space of 12 years . this colossus
signeur of venice , when it was in their hands , a million of crowns yearly . for these customs and profits were farmed for 500000 crowns a year , which being turned into the chief cypriot commodities , were at their
war came hither : afterwards it was divided between nine petty princes , all of which were subdued by cyrus the first monarch of the medes and persians . his empire being subverted by alexander , this island was given to the
of his father paphus . it was of old famous for the temple of venus . 2 famagusta on the south-sea , built by teucer , & called salamine : at the besieging of which town the turks spent 118000 great bullets
paphos , built , as it is by most said , by cineras ( the father of myrrha , & father and grandfather to adonis ) who so called it in memory of his father paphus . it was of old famous
of any foreign nation , it is of it self able to bu_ld a tall ship from the keele to the topsayle , and so to put it to sea furnished with all things needful for a voyage , or a sea-fight
. these inconveniences notwithstanding , it is stored with such plenty of all things , that without the help of any foreign nation , it is of it self able to bu_ld a tall ship from the keele to the topsayle ,
breadth but 65 miles . it is situate under the fourth climate , the longest day being 14 hours and a half : and is 60 miles distant from the rocky shore of cilicia , and a hundred from the maine land
parts ; putting , as it were , bound between the dominions of the king of borneo , on the north side ; & of laus , on the south side . the idolatrous people reverence the sun and moon , whō
the gulf of bengala . it is in length 250 , and in breadth 140 miles . so fruitful that grass grows , and trees bear fruit all the year long without intermission . the chief cities are zeilan , and 2
fellows , an. 1542 . it is much frequented by the iesuites , of whom 200 are said to live here ; xavier one of ignatius first companions leading the way . 2 zeilan or sarrandill lies in the gulf of bengala
always lived unconquered , unless it were in the days of farfar , the 242 king . he was told by prophecy , that he should be depriued of his kingdom , by one which had 100 eyes : which _ell out
160•h degree of longitude . it is divided into 15 provinces , to the least of which , our europaean countries cannot admit comparison : which together with their towns and cities thus follow . the provinces , towns , and cities
for the name of china it is used only by vs of europe , the inhabitants calling themselves tamans , and tabencos ; the arabians , tzinin ; paulus venetus . mangi ; & their neighbours , sangley : china therefore is
equalizing all europe ; for it is said to be 3000 leagues in compass , and 1800 leagues in length . as for the name of china it is used only by vs of europe , the inhabitants calling themselves tamans ,
mentz perfected . now whereas it is by some doubted , whether the art of printing be available to the proficiency & advancement of learning , or no ; i must not herein be both judge and party : but must leave
year 1440 . at harlem it is said to be first practised , and at mentz perfected . now whereas it is by some doubted , whether the art of printing be available to the proficiency & advancement of learning , or
the city of pegu , it is the fairest and most elegant city of all india ; strengthened with large and defensive walls , and adorned with neat and proportionable houses . it stands on a river so named , and is
repeople the world anew . it is situate on the bank of the river menan , which every year over - flows the country for the compass of 120 miles : by which flood , the king of pegu besieging this town
the king of barma , it is wholly subject to their command : the most remarkable of these 12 kingdoms , are these seven . 1 macin , famous for the wood called aloes , by the arabians called calambuco , by
be no less then 600000. it was once the seat of the rusbeti , who are the ancient nobility of this country : whom the saracens under the leading of one machumat , subdued about 160 years since . to this machumat
the south the ocean . it is a country very fruitful , and exceedingly thick set with men and villages , of which last here is thought to be no less then 600000. it was once the seat of the rusbeti ,
lies along the sea shore it is a custom here for the king to give to some of the brachmanni , the hanselling of his nuptial bed . for which cause not the kings , but the kings sisters sons , succeed
safe , then capacious : it is distant from calecute 10 leagues . 2 coccinum , or cochin , distant from calecute 30 leagues . the governor of this town is the pope or summus pontifex of the brachmans : and 3
suis ora perusta viris . it is not to die a shame , they therefo_e strive who may be famed to follow him alive : the victor burns , yields to the flame her breast , and her burnt face doth on
ocean . the breadth of it is in the narrowest place 8 , in the broadest 20 miles ; the depth of it is never less then 100 foot . that this river is not that which is called in the scriptures
sarmachand , being ( as it were ) the common emporie . neither did the egyptians at all enter into india , but were met by the indians at ormus , or some other island : ( even as now the chinoys
, they may ( as it were ) by privilege , deflower virgins , and commit what riots they list . others of them live together with the people , as being their ordinary priests . of these alexander surprised 10 ,
excepting tartaria and china . it is situate between the first and sixth climats , the longest day being in the south parts of 12 hours only ; but in the north fifteen hours and a half . concerning the monst_ous fables
. their second expedition as it was more necessary , hunger enforcing them to it ; so was it also more prosperous : stating them in a great part of the greater armenia , anno 1844 ; and what they have since
to his monarchy . afterward it was made subject to the persians , then to the syrian successors of alexander , till the year of the world , 3720: in which time theodates , one who was but governor of 1000 cities
iaich : and is as it were the mother of the rest . it had particular kings till the year 1506 , when the cham of the precopenses subdued them : but they discontentedly bearing the yoke , gave unto basilius a
and together with persia , it is now subject to the sophios . thus much of parthia . of tartaria. tartaria is bounded on the east with the eastern ocean , on the west with muscouie , and moldauia ; on the
the parthian state , as it was primarily wrought by the vnresistible power of heaven ; so may wee refer it , as to a second cause unto the barbarous massacre of this people by antoninus caracalla , and a quarrel thence
justly i know not : it is a disputation aboue my moderating , sir john smith , and sir roger williams having defended their several parts in it , and many good judgements siding with the one and the other . i
the south with charmania . it is now called erach . the chief cities are 1 guerde , 2 iesdi , 3 hispaa , ( formerly hircatompile ) of that bigness , that the persians call it hyperbolically , half the world
a mountainous and hilly country it is , scarce known in the time of alexander to its next borderers : at what time the people were so rude , that the barbarous nations their neighbours held them not worthy their acquaintance .
sake ) alexandria arachosiae . it was built by alexander , at the foot of the hill caucasus , and made a macedonian colonie ; here being 7000 old macedonian soldiers left by him to people and inhabit it . the whole
situate north on drangiana , it is now called sargulzar , the chief city being called aria . the people of this country having rebelled against alexander , were by him vanquished ; and compelled to hide themselves in a cave ,
his actions were less then it is thought ; since he laboured so earnestly to make them thought more then they were . 5 drangiana lies northward to gedrosia : the chief cities are 1 timocani , 2 sishan ( formerly prolasia
son hauilah ; from whence it is in the scriptures called the land of hauilah where there is gold , and which the river pison is said to compass gen . 2.11 . which pison is the southern branch of the river
situate eastward of persis . it is so called quasi chushiana from chus , the son of hem , the son of noah ; who first peopled here , and afterward withdrew himself more southwestward , where the three arabians now are
about on horse back . it is well walled , and fortefied with a strong fort ; and beautified with two seraglioes , the walls whereof are made of red marble , and paved with mosaic work . the chief street hereof
tauris by sophie tamas . it is also called hispaan , and is said to be a days journey about on horse back . it is well walled , and fortefied with a strong fort ; and beautified with two seraglioes ,
iron gates : taken nevertheless it was in the last wars against the persian , and still remains under the turks . the chief rivers of this province are arasse , and ciro . the ancient cities of this country were laodicea
towns of the east : it was said by plinie to be ingens naturae miraculum , and is now called derbent ; a strong city , environed with two walls , and fortefied with iron gates : taken nevertheless it was in
seated nigh unto it . it is the biggest sea absolu_ely of all them , which have no commerce with the ocean . this country is generally barren , especially in the northern parts ; so that they make their bread for
and daniell already quoted : it is diametrally opposite to another place of the same daniell , in his ninth chapter , where he is called darius of the seed of the medes . of this darius more anon when we come
of the word , as it is in the same chapter ; and darius the mede took the empire : by which word , took , is implied , not a forcible invasion , but a willing acceptance of the empire offered
his next successor . for it is of all things the most foolish both to loose our treasure , & with it to enrich our adversaries . on which consideration the spaniards fired their indian fleet at gades , & the genoais
unto his enemies : and it is possible it might be in policy ; that so great a treasure not fallen to the possession of his foes , might so much the more disable them from making resistance against , or detaining
was that day slain . it is said to have been invented by the lycians . 4ly angurium ab auium garritu , was a prediction from the chirping or chattering of birds ; as also by the sounds and voices we hear
of this macedonian captain ; it was 3 days , before one part took notice of the conquest . nabuchadnezar mightily increased this city ; which being almost ruined , was reedified by bugiafar , caliph of the sarracens , at the
blood th'assyrian carras plains . it is now called carr amida , or caramit , and is the seat of a turkish bassa , who is of great command in those parts . 3 madri_ . chaldea is bounded on the east
que que proveherentur . but it is now high time to go on in my journey to carra , observing only by the way , that when the valorous christians had recovered this country , and the holy land ; for the
very fertile ; and now it is called dierbecke . the soil is exceeding fertile , yielding in most places 200 , in some 300 increase . here abraham was borne : hither he sent his servant to choose a wife for
mesopotamia , quasi , because it is environed with the rivers tigris and euphrates , which overflow the country , as nilus doth egypt , making it very fertile ; and now it is called dierbecke . the soil is exceeding fertile
high : in the hebrew it is called ruhaboth ; in eusebius time nisib ; now almost ruined to nothing . sic patet exemplis oppida posse mori. examples plainly do affirm , towns have for life a settled term : through this
the confusion of tongues . it is now ( as maginus informs vs ) called by niger , adrinsa ; by mercator , sarth ; by pin_tus , mosul ; by some , azemia ; by others , arzerum . it contains
the gods more liberally , it was subdued unto the turks by selimus the first , immediately after his conquest of egypt : yet are the people rather tributaries unto , then prouincialls of the turkish empire . two kings they have
in barbary . and now it is time to return again to arabia , which followed ( as we told you ) the fortune of the four great monarchies . in the conquest of it by the first three , there occurreth
pretended omnipotency ; he said it was only a divine rapture , wherein he conversed with the angel gabriel . he was well seen in magic , by whose aid and help of the di_ell , he taught a white pigeon to
their feet . thirdly , it is ordinary to draw them naked up to the top of a gibbet , or tower , full of hooks ; and cutting the rope , to let them fall down again . but by the
. the whole body of it is but an exposition and gloss of these 8 commandments . first , every one ought to believe that god is a great god , and only god , and mahomet is his prophet . they
is called the alcoran . it was composed by osmen the 4th caliph ; who seeing the saracens daily inclining to divers heresies , by reason of some false copies of mahomets laws ; and that the empire by the same means
so called , either because it is so rocky ; or from petra the chief town , now called rathalalah : the second town of note , is aresh , or arissa , consisting of a few houses , and a royal
entrance to the rest till it were removed . this young princess secretly got a staff like unto these of her brothers , which when she was desirous of privacy , she placed at her chamber door , and so divers times
( as no question but it is ) possible . and so wee have the end of the ottoman race . supposing then the o_toman line to fail ( as in all likelihood it may ) what then becomes of this vast
settled in their governments , it is a crime meriting no less punishment then death , to depart thence and come unto constantinople , before their fathers death , or unless they are by their fathers sent for . of this we
liberal and princely maintenance , it is more then probable , they would rest content , as in other kingdoms the younger princes do . and notwithstanding this barbarous policy , they are not quite free from fear ; as knowing that
of land is conquered , it is divided into divers parts , and committed to the manuring of divers men whom they call timariots . these are to pay unto the emperor certain rents , & at their own charges to send
. perceiving now how necessary it was to hinder their return homeward , he stops all the passages towards armenia , intending to use the turks ( as they do now their asaph ) to blunt the sword of the enemy .
age named esechia . famous it is for two notable bat _ailes fought by it ; the first between lucullus and his romans on the one side ; against mithridates and tigranes on the othe_ : wherein the romans were victors :
the founder of it . it is now called coy , and was in the middle age named esechia . famous it is for two notable bat _ailes fought by it ; the first between lucullus and his romans on the one
so called , either because it was seated on the river araxis ; or from artaxes a progenitour of tigranes , who was the founder of it . it is now called coy , and was in the middle age named esechia
new city tigrano certa , it was by lucullus the roman general , besieged & taken ; wherein besides other riches was found 3000 talents in ready money . 5 artaxata , once the chief city of armenia , so called ,
inhabited the adjacent countries . it is bounded on the east with media , on the west with colchis ; on the north with albania , or swiria ; and on the south with the greater armenia , or turcomania : so
particulars of this country , it is necessary we should take a survey of those mountains , which lying east of euphrates , part this country from anatolia . these mountains are reputed to be those parts of the hills taurus ,
french kings , and first it was debated what tongue the negotiation should be handled in . a spaniard thinking to give the english commissioners a shrewd gird , proposed the french tongue as most fit ; it being a language which
anno 615 . from them it was forcibly wrested by haumar and the saracens , anno 637 . next it fell into the power of cutlu moses and the turks , anno 1009: under whose oppression when it had long groaned ,
assembled , god ( as it were ) thus imprisoning them . all these massacres , besides divers others which i have omitted , and infinite numbers which were slain in the fields & villages , which drowned themselves , and which
siege to the city , it was in the feast of the passeouer , when most of the people were there assembled , god ( as it were ) thus imprisoning them . all these massacres , besides divers others which i
, or to strangers , it was not lawful to eat it . and when titus laid siege to the city , it was in the feast of the passeouer , when most of the people were there assembled , god (
the people : and as it is in the 18th of ioshuah v. the 17 . the _riesthood of the lord was their inheritance . there were of them four kinds , 1 punies or tirones , which from their childhood till
mount oliuet also comprehended . it is now famous for the temple of the sepulchre built by helena ( whom most report to have been daughter to coylus a british king ) mother to constantine the great . much ado had the
fire by nabuchadneza . certainly it is worth the noting ( i hope i shall not herein be accounted superstitious ) to see how happy or unfortunate one and the same day is in diverse causes . in the wars between the
to jew & gentile . it was finally destroyed by titus the son of vespasian on the tenth day of august , on which day also the first temple was cōsumed with fire by nabuchadneza . certainly it is worth the noting
now ruinous , partly because it was not magnificent enough , but principally to _urry favour with the iewes ; herod the ascalonite plucked down and reedified ; making it as little inferior to the first , so much superior to the
this temple , partly because it was now ruinous , partly because it was not magnificent enough , but principally to _urry favour with the iewes ; herod the ascalonite plucked down and reedified ; making it as little inferior to the
from the babylonian captivity , it was rebuilt ; but with such opposition of the samaritans , that the workmen were fine to hold their swords in one hand & their tools in the other , to repulse , if need were
the 6 and 7 . it was destroyed by nabuchadnezar , at the taking of hierusalem , ao . m. 3350 . after the return of the iewes again from the babylonian captivity , it was rebuilt ; but with such opposition
wish or execration . and it is possible , it may be he chose rather to build the eternity of his name , upon so pleasing and stately a city ; then on the lives and issue of two young men .
it . but ( as it was foretold by iosuah ) as he laid the foundation of the walls , he lost his eldest son ; and when he had finished it , and was setting up the gates thereof , he
the midst of canaan , it was ( together with gilgal ) made the seat of justice , to which samuel went yearly to give judgment to the people . 3 gebah the north border of the kingdom of iuda , toward
herod repairing called herodium ; it was seated on a hill , the ascent unto which , was made with 200 steps of marble exceeding fair and large . in this country also , are the hills of engaddi , in a
ancientest cities of canaan . it was the seat of the giants called anakim , or the sons of anak . this word anak signifyeth a chain worn for ornament ; and it seems that this anak enriched with the spoils of
two of his disciples : it was afterward called nicopolis . 6 hebron one of the ancientest cities of canaan . it was the seat of the giants called anakim , or the sons of anak . this word anak signifyeth a
, as it was when it was the kingdom of iuda , containing the two great and puissant tribes of iuda , and beniamin . the chief cities in the tribe of iudah are arad situate in the entrance from the wilderness
same extent now , as it was when it was the kingdom of iuda , containing the two great and puissant tribes of iuda , and beniamin . the chief cities in the tribe of iudah are arad situate in the entrance
the israelites under moses . it was after called simply sittim , and yielded the wood so often mentioned in the scripture whereof the arc was made . 4 ramath baal , to which place balack brought balaam to curse the people
the sons of ismael . it was also a part of the country of decapolis , so named of ten prime cities in it , which extended from bethsan south , to libanus north ; from the mountains of gilead east ,
monarchy called trachonitis , because it is bounded eastward with the hills of gilead , which the cosmographers of that age called trachones . some also call it iturea , but improperly : for iturea was seated more toward syro - phoenicia
sick of the palsy . it is since called diosp_lis , and in it s. george was beheaded . 5 ramatha or arimathea , the city of ioseph , who buried the body of christ . 6 s_lo seated on a mountain
stood , was bought . it was by hircanus the high priest beaten to the ground , but repaired again by herod , who to flatter caesar called it sebaste , for the greekes called augustus . here lay the bodies of
the virgins divine presence , it was by the angels carried over into the sea coast of italy anno 1294 . that place also being infected with thieves and pirats , the angels removed it to the little village of loretto ,
insert this famous legend . it was after the virgins death had in great reverence by the christians , and remained in this town till the holy - land was by the turks and saracens subdued anno 1291 . then was it
and slain by iael . it was also called hazor . 2 capernaum ( seated on the influxe of iordan into the sea of galilie ) so often mentioned in the scriptures . 3 cinnereth called afterward genesareth , whence the lake
gentiles ; or else because it was by k. solomon given unto hiram king of tire . it contained the tribes of asher , naphtali , and a part of the tribe of dan. the chief cities of the tribe of asher
galilea gentium , either because it is between the rest of the holy land and the gentiles ; or else because it was by k. solomon given unto hiram king of tire . it contained the tribes of asher , naphtali ,
northern part of palestine , it is divided into the higher and the lower . the higher galilie is also called galilea gentium , either because it is between the rest of the holy land and the gentiles ; or else because
the kingdom of dauid , it was divided into the kingdoms of iuda and israel : of which the former contained only the two tribes of iuda and beniamin ; the latter the other ten . when the israelites were transported into
conquest of these people , it was divided between the people of israel into 12 tribes , as the tribe of iuda , beniamin , ephraim , &c. when jeroboam had made that great breach in the kingdom of dauid , it
they lived together , as it were , in colleges , and in every one had their , or chapel for their devotion . all their estates they enjoyed in common , and received no man into their fellowship , unless he
hours and a quarter . it is in length 200 miles , & not aboue 50 in breadth ; yet of that salubrity of air , and fertility of soil , flowing with milk and honey : that before the coming of
work of our salvation . it is situate between the third and fourth climats , the longest day being 14 hours and a quarter . it is in length 200 miles , & not aboue 50 in breadth ; yet of that
sea : on the north it is bounded with phoenicia ; on the south with arabia . this country was first called the land of canaan , from canaan the son of cham . secondly , the land of promise , because
here is in great plentyl it is called in the scriptures aram sobab , 2 sam. 8 .3. this town is famous for a wonderful confluence of merchants from all parts , who come hither to traffic . 3 biblis . 4
town his paradise . for it is seated in a very fruitful soil , bearing grapes all the year , and girt round about with most curious and odoriferous gardens . this town is famous for her founders , being abrahams servants
and it happened accordingly . it is now under the emir of the drusians . this country abounds with wheat , honey , oil , and balm : the lower part whereof was the seat of asher , of whom moyses prophesied
c_ordes , descended , as it is though , of the ancient parthians . these men worship the devil , and as themselves judge , not without reason . for god ( they say ) is a good man , and will
spencer in his f. q. it was called phrygia from phryxus , son to athamas king of the_es , who flying from the treacherous snares of his mother ino , here seated himself . here are the mountains tmolus and ida .
calice was english ; and it were not amiss if we used the same custom , till it be again recovered . lydia took its name , either from lydus a noblemā of great power : or from lord the fourth son
the strongest ; and when it was once taken by the grecians , xerxes gave commandment , that every day at dinner one speaking aloud , should say , that the grecians had taken sardis . such an order the french had
( unless as others conjecture it were a plantation of the phoenicians ) others living in an unwilling subjection in the time of darius histaspis again revolted . in which rebellion the athenians assisted the ionians , which was the principal motive
rest of marble pollisht . it was fired 7 times , and lastly by erostratus ( that night in which alexander was borne ) to get himself a name , 5 priene the birth - place of bias . in this country
of the worlds wonders . it was 200 years in building , contrived by ctesiphon : being 425 foot long and 220 broad : sustained with 127 pillars of marble 70 foot high ; whereof 27 were most curiously graven , and
ottomanicall family subverted it . it is now a zanziack - ship , and yields to the great turk 80000 ducats yearly . 5 ionia. on the north side of carta is ionia , whose chief cities are 1 miletum , the
hours & a half . it is adorned with many commodious havens , and was once of great fertility , but is now laid wast and desolate , greivously lamenting the ruins of 4000 cities and towns . the people were once
rhodian and lycian seas . it was formerly called asia minor , to distinguish it from asia the greater : but now anatolia ( and corruptly natolia ) from its more eastern situation in respect of greece . there is another asia
bin called the western england it is almost as big as ireland , and is subject to the king of denmark . 4 nova zemia lies on the north of muscovie & lapland , and is famous for nothing but the pigmies
conjecture , is , because it is indeed the remotest part of the old world : but greater reasons are against it . for when solinus saith , multa sunt circa britanniam insulae , è quibus thyle ultima ; i hope thyle
months & a half : it is in length more then 600 miles . this country _is not yet sufficiently discovered , but generally known to abound in grass , which nourishes great store of cattle : & gives air to a
animosity of the inhabitants . it is subjected to the county of southampton for her government , and was taken from the britains by wolphar king of mercia . of this island henry the sixth crowned henry beauchamp earl of warwicke ,
the mother of wales . it was once the seat of the druides , first conquered by suetonius paulinus , & united to the english crown by the valour of edward the first . 3 iarsey is in compass 30 miles ,
and borders on carnarvonshire . it is in length 20 , in breadth 17 miles , containing in former times 360 villages and towns , of which the chief are beaumar_sh towards wales , 2 newburg , & 3 aberfraw , on
false to his sovereign , it was given to the stanlies ; now earles of darbie . 2 anglesey is counted a shire of wales , and borders on carnarvonshire . it is in length 20 , in breadth 17 miles ,
300 families , and now it is furnished with 17 parish churches . the chief towns are 1 balacuri , and 2 russin or castle - town , the seat of a bishop , who though he be under the archbishop of
hither out of britain . it is in length 30 miles , in breadth 15 miles , and but 8 in some places . the people hate theft , and begging ; they use a language mixed of the norvegian and irish
it that every rebel_ion when it is surprest , doth make the prince stronger , and the subjects weaker . ireland thus broken & ploughed , that glorious q_eene died , a victor over all enemies ; and lest the sowing of
, and an university . it was built by harald harfager , the first king of norwey , and after the english conquest , was peopled by a colony of our bristoll men . the whole number of counties in ireland is
on the north meth . it is divided into the counties of kilkennie , caterlogh , kildare , kings county , or ophalie , queens county or lease , w_isbford , and dublin , the chief towns are 1 mary bourg in
on the west lemster . it is divided into the counties of east - meth , west - meth , & long - ford . the chief towns of it are 1 kellye . 2 . trim . and 3 tredagh .
parts , the sea . it is divided into the countries of louth , canan , fermanagh , down , monagham , armach , antrim , tirconnel , colran , and tir oen , whose rebellious earles have bin so long traitors
on the south mounster . it is divided into the counties of mato , twomond , galway , slego , roscoman , and letrim , this last belonging once to the o rorkes . the chief cities are 1 bunratti . 2
on the north connaght : it is divided into the counties of kerrie , waterford , desmond , cork , tiperarie , & holy cross . the chief cities are , 1 limericke on the banks of shennin . 2 cork .
in breadth 200 miles . it is situate under the 10th and 12th climates , the longest day being 16 hou_es and more . the island hath by some bin termed scotia , because the scotti coming from spain , dwelt there
name in scotland . but it is now high time ( the prophecies being fulfilled , and my story finished ) to attend king kenneth , & his successors . the kings of all scotland . 839 1 kenneth 17 . 856
attempted his death : for it was his destiny never to be slain by any man borne of a woman . now then is thy fatal hour come , said mackduffe , for i was never borne of a woman , but
with the same prerogatives . it is called in latin fanum r_guli , and took both this and the english name on this occasion . the bones of s. andrew the apostle , were translated from patra in morea , where he
is yet in force . it was called marcheta mul_eris : but whether from mare , a horse in the old gall_que , ( implying the obscene signification of equitare ) as m. selden thinks : or marca the sum of money
saxons . and very probable it is ( for so much i have heard a judicious gentleman of this nation affirm ) the scots & saxons invading this island nigh at the same time ; that the saxons might seize upon the
one to the other . it is in length ( according to polidor ) 480 miles , but of no great breadth ; there being no place distant from the seas 60 miles ; and the country ending like the sharpe point
christians . in like manner it is the law of these borderers never to believe any scot complainining against an englishman , unless some other englishman will witness for him ; & so on the other side : ex jure quodam inter
fly from three scots . it is a custom among the turks not to believe a christian or a jew complaining against a turk , except thee occusation be confirmed by the testimony of some turk also : which seldom happening is
called kings of matrafall . it was then a great and a fair town ; now nothing in a manner , but a bare name : and stands in an equal distance between welch - poole , and lanvilling , in montgomeryshire
estimate of those times , it was held to be 15 cantre_s , or hundreds of villages , ( the word cant , signifying an hundred . & tref , a village . ) this country was by th'aboue-mentioned rodericke given unto
as for s. dauids , it was in former times an archbishops see ; but a grievous pestilence here raging , the see was translated into little britain in france . the ordinary market - towns ; for so many as i
84 miles in length . it was built by offa king of the mercyans , and is in welch called claud offa , that is , offa's dike . concerning this ditch king harald made a law , that what welshman soever
, anno 647 . after it was seized on by the danes , and from them again recovered by edward the elder . anno 917 . 7 the most strong and prevailing kingdom was of the west-saxons , containing the damnonij ,
several battles ; & pity it is . his achievements came not unto vs entire in themselves , & vnmixt with the fabulous deeds of arms , attributed to him & his knights of the round table . for by this over
the romans hither : certain it is , caesar found the people very uncivil and illiterate , all the learning being lo_ked up in the breasts of the druides ; who not writing any thing , but telling and teaching by word
indifferency then the civil . it is wondrous populous , containing well nigh 400000 people , which number is much augmented in the term time . i compare london with paris thus ; london is the richer , the more populous ,
kent or cantium , because it is a corner of the isle , the word importing as much ; as we may see by the word canton still in use among heralds . of those shires the biggest is yorkshire , out
; these last being as it were the knights & burgesses of the house . the shires were first made by king alfred , both for the easier & speedier administration of justice : & because the natural inhabitants of the land
a_d perfect : and wonder it is how calvins presbyterie made only to content the citizens of geneva , without any blemish found in the order of bishops , was so headily received , and is as importunately desired . the most
zealously superstitious browni_ts ; yet it is most absolute a_d perfect : and wonder it is how calvins presbyterie made only to content the citizens of geneva , without any blemish found in the order of bishops , was so headily received
preach in paris , though it were in a fools coat , he would most willingly accept the condition ; adding withal , that he would never for any ceremony , deprive the church of those gifts , wherewith god had blessed
confirm the gospel . yet it is not a fabulous vanity , to say that austin first preached the gospel here ; for this is not to be understood absolutely , that he first preached it ; but that he first preached
trade , might be as it were , a seminary of good & able mariners , as well for the wars , as for further navigations ; cannot but be very prejudicial to the strength & flourishing of our commonwealth and empire
the warm sun : but it is not so . for there are no seas in europe tha_ yield more plenty of fish then ours . our oysters were famous in the times of the old romans ; & our herrings are
and spain . and also it is here more hot then there , because the winds participating of the seas over which they pass unto vs , do carry with them a temperate warmth . but if warmth were all the benefit
the danish word oela ; it is questionless in it self ( and without that commixture which some are accused to use with it ) a very wholesome drink : however it pleased a poet in the time of henry the third
men in this art , it was by a statute made the 27th of edward the 3d , enacted to be felony , to carry any wools unwrought . when england had for some short time enjoyed the benefit of these staples
paradise of women . and it is a common by-word among the italians , that if there were a bridge built over the narrow seas , all the women of europe would run into england . for here they have the upper
hell of horses ; so it is acknowledged the paradise of women . and it is a common by-word among the italians , that if there were a bridge built over the narrow seas , all the women of europe would run
: that england , as it is termed the purgatory of servants , & the hell of horses ; so it is acknowledged the paradise of women . and it is a common by-word among the italians , that if there were
saxons , conquered it . it is in length 320 miles ; enjoying a soil equally participating of ground fit for tillage & pasture : yet to pasture more then tillage are our people addicted , as a course of life not
only an obscure twilight . it is divided into england , wales , and scotland . england . england is bounded on the east with the german , on the west with the irish , on the south with the british oceans
the _paniards warlike munition . it was taken in one day by the english under the conduct of charles earl of nottingham , robert earl of essex , and sir walter rawleigh . in this day they burned the indian fleet ,
part of the world . it was once called tartessa , and is in length 13 miles , & hath of late been the magazine of the _paniards warlike munition . it was taken in one day by the english under the
city caliaris it self , it is exempt from the legal jurisdiction even of the vice - roe ; & is governed by a council of its own citizens . the arms of this island are or , a cross gules ,
807 . from these last it was recovered by the genoys & pisans : & because they could not agree about their bounds , boniface the eight putting his finger in another mans pie , gave it in see to james king
say ) to hercules . it was first under the iol_tenses : secondly , from them taken by the carthaginians : thirdly , by the romans : fourthly , by the saracens , anno 807 . from these last it was recovered
the villages , base . it is divided into two parts , viz: cape lugudori towards corsica , and cape cegliari towards _fricke . of these , when this island was jointly vn_er the _isans and genowaies ; the first , being
day being 14 hours . it is fertile in respect of corsica , barren if compared to sicily ; abundant in corn , deficient in oil ; well stored with all sorts of cattaile , as plainly appears by that plenty of
, 560 in circuit : it is situate under the 4 climate , the longest day being 14 hours . it is fertile in respect of corsica , barren if compared to sicily ; abundant in corn , deficient in oil ;
but 7 miles distant . it is in length 180 miles , 90 in breadth , 560 in circuit : it is situate under the 4 climate , the longest day being 14 hours . it is fertile in respect of corsica
conquered it , from them it was taken by the pisans : but recovered again by the genowaies , who still enjoy it . the people are churlish , stubborn , poor , unlearned , & use a corrupt italian . they
, first discovered it . it is divided in cismontanam , and vitramontanam . the chief rivers of both being g_lo and travignano . this country yields excellent dogs for game , good horses , fierce mastifes , and a beast called
and 325 in circuit . it is under the fifth clime , the longest day being almost 15 hours . this island was first named cyrnus , 2l• teracina , now corsica , from a woman so named , who following her
of treasure from him ; it was in the year 1261 , given unto charles earl of provence and aniou , brother to lewis 10th . under him those countries jointly continued subject , till the year 1281 , in which time
earl thus refusing it , it was offered to the king his brother , for his second son edmund , who was invested by the gift of a ring , and in his name the pope coined money , with the inscription
) stand continually open . it is also an archbishops see . after this island was once known to the greekes , there came from all parts of greece , colonies to inhabit it , as from athens , sparta , corinth
the spanish viceroy : situate it is on the west cape of the island , over - against sardinia , beautified with large streets , delicate buildings , strong walls , and magnificent temples . ii vallis de noto toward the southeast
perire sua . most just it is a man should be tormented , with that which first his cruel wit invented . 3 palermo , formerly called panormus , a colonie of the phenicians , and now the chief city of sicily
commanding all the rest . it was the custom of this town , when any of the nobility began to grow too potent among them , to write his name in an olive leaf , which being put into his hand ,
in it 4 towns as it were , viz: isle , acradin , neapolis , and tyche , together with the fort hexapyle , commanding all the rest . it was the custom of this town , when any of the nobility
oftentimes on scylla run . it is situate under the 4 climate , the longest day being 13 hours and a half . the first name was trinacria , for that being triangular , it butts into the sea with 3 promontories
wines , & pul_e ; it is 30 miles in compass . 4 grissa or pago glorying in her salt - pits , and being second for bigness in all this sea , as containing in compass 100 miles . 5 lesina
every ascention day ; so it is baptised by the bishop of zant , every epiphany day . the lands of this sea are neither many , great , nor famous ; the most pleasant are 1 the absirtides , so called
of _ridanus or poe . it was accounted a sea wonderful unsafe and tempestuous , as appeared by the improbo vacundior adria , in horace , by the minax adri__ cum , in catullas , and the ventosi tumor adria , in
3 castello st angelo . it is very fruitful in wax ; honny , wine , oil , &c. here reigned alcinous whose gardens are so memorised by the poets . quid bifera alcinoi referam pomaria ? vos que que qui nunquam
have found impregnable . for it is situate at the foot of a mountain , on the top of which are built two vnaccessible fortresses , as being strongly fenced with a natural rock . the one of these is called the
from peloponesus 20 miles : it was so called of zacinthus son to dordanus . the country is wonderfully stoared with oil , wines , currants , of which last they make yearly 150000 z_cchines for their own coffer_ : and 18000
yield good plenty . defended it is by the rocks in themselves inaccessible , which on all sides environ ie : havens it hath many , but those small , and difficult to enter . it hath a town also of the
